[Amit Varma]: Regular listeners of the scene and the unseen would have heard me complain about the predatory
[Amit Varma]: parasitic Indian state.
[Amit Varma]: But this is a bit of a simplification.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, the Indian state is a parasite, but it is not just one thing.
[Amit Varma]: It is a vast complex machine with many moving parts, and the whole is worse than the sum
[Amit Varma]: of its parts.
[Amit Varma]: There are outstanding bureaucrats and well-meaning politicians within the system, but there are
[Amit Varma]: also bad incentives, which lead to bad outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: Also, the Indian state is a multi-headed monster, and some of those heads are often at war with
[Amit Varma]: each other.
[Amit Varma]: Consider, for example, the constant tussle between the government and the central bank.
[Amit Varma]: Our imagination feasts on conflict and battle and winners and losers, but it must be said
[Amit Varma]: that no one is making a Netflix series anytime soon on the life of a central banker.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they should.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Viral Acharya, who was deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of India between
[Amit Varma]: 2017 and 2019.
[Amit Varma]: Widely respected among economists, Viral quit the RBI six months before his term ended reportedly
[Amit Varma]: because he wasn't happy with the way the government was preventing the RBI from carrying out its
[Amit Varma]: duty.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, he wasn't happy.
[Amit Varma]: Viral has just released an excellent book called Quest for Restoring Financial Stability
[Amit Varma]: in India, in which he lays out in great detail why we are in the middle of a crisis.
[Amit Varma]: At the core of it is a concept called fiscal dominance.
[Amit Varma]: If I had to sum that up, I'd do it thus.
[Amit Varma]: Fiscal dominance is a means by which a state thrives at the expense of society using the
[Amit Varma]: central bank as its tool.
[Amit Varma]: If you think this is going to be a boring episode about finance, let me assure you,
[Amit Varma]: Viral is anything but a boring, funny, nutty technocrat.
[Amit Varma]: He loves cricket.
[Amit Varma]: He's written and composed a music album called Yadav Ke Silsile and can make economics and
[Amit Varma]: finance quite as lovely and interesting as both cricket and music.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin our conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken up
[Amit Varma]: to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this, for every episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going, sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Viral, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: I'm delighted to be part of your podcast and I look forward to the interaction.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we start talking about your book and in a broader sense about India's
[Amit Varma]: system of governance and our financial system and all of that, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: your sort of personal journey, where did you study, what did you do, what were your sort
[Amit Varma]: of intellectual influences that shaped you along the way?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, I studied at, we used to live in South Bombay, in Chira Bazar in a street
[Guest]: called Ghazdar Street.
[Guest]: I grew up frankly, like any other street boy, I used to play a lot of gully cricket and
[Guest]: dance all the way with Ganpati from our street to the Chowpatty for Ganpati Visarjan and
[Guest]: all that.
[Guest]: I was in a school, in a Gujarati school, which also had English medium called Fellowship
[Guest]: School.
[Guest]: And the reason why I'm going through a little bit of my school journey is actually that
[Guest]: was probably the most important intellectual part of my journey.
[Guest]: And we were in this very interesting phase of the school where a set of school teachers,
[Guest]: they decided that our school should also be able to produce students who are in the merit
[Guest]: list of the state for the SSC, the 10th standard exam.
[Guest]: And you know, the school was very balanced culturally, we had actually great music and
[Guest]: cultural aspect to the school, but on the academic side, I think the teachers were excellent.
[Guest]: But you know, cracking exams and getting into merit list requires a slightly focused kind
[Guest]: of preparation.
[Guest]: And these teachers actually, around the time maybe we were in seventh or eighth grade,
[Guest]: they set this motto for all of us that, you know, this is the challenge, this is the luxury
[Guest]: that we have to achieve.
[Guest]: And then, you know, it was, they were so motivated, of course, parents in India are always motivated
[Guest]: for their kids to do well.
[Guest]: And then we also got a bit charged up.
[Guest]: And one of the teachers, he passed away two years back, his name is Shailesh Chassar,
[Guest]: as we used to call him.
[Guest]: And in fact, my book, Quest for Restoring Financial Stability in India is dedicated
[Guest]: to him.
[Guest]: He was the one who kind of really set me on fire, so to speak.
[Guest]: He tutored me as a private coach, so to speak, you know, without charging my parents single
[Guest]: paisa for three years in a row.
[Guest]: But it was his single-minded focus that in the end created that aspiration, that ambition.
[Guest]: And as I said, whenever I think of him, I think of this, you know, Hrithik Roshan's
[Guest]: song from Lakshya, Lakshya ko har haal mein paana hai, you know, it was that kind of single-minded
[Guest]: focus.
[Guest]: And, you know, it then sort of all worked out.
[Guest]: And you know, I got into Rupert Hill College, which was sort of the college to be in if
[Guest]: you had done well in SSE that time, I took Electronics.
[Guest]: And then I had a friend in my street just across our building, you know, a lot of people
[Guest]: you knew in our street more because you could look into their balconies.
[Guest]: And he had been at IIT Mumbai.
[Guest]: And so I spoke to him, then, you know, we got into some correspondence courses, I got
[Guest]: into IIT.
[Guest]: Like everyone who does well in the JEE entrance exam, I also took Computer Science without
[Guest]: thinking whether that's the right field for me or not.
[Guest]: But after that ambitious phase of the school, IIT was, I would say, more of a self-discovery,
[Guest]: self-exploration phase.
[Guest]: I think that was the time I realized that Computer Science wasn't my calling.
[Guest]: I had some aptitude for it, but I wouldn't say a great aptitude for it.
[Guest]: I was still doing okay through sheer persistence and hard work.
[Guest]: But I really felt that this is not the subject that I'm breathing, I'm not sleeping.
[Guest]: This is not what I mean is I'm not staying awake because of the problems in Computer
[Guest]: Science.
[Guest]: And I started exploring a bit and I took a course in International Finance with Professor
[Guest]: Pushpa Trivedi.
[Guest]: It was an elective course in the last year at IIT Bombay.
[Guest]: And I would say Professor Pushpa Trivedi was like my second critical intellectual mentor
[Guest]: in this journey because her course was really the turning point.
[Guest]: It made it clear to me that economics was a subject where you could really bridge the
[Guest]: macro with the micro.
[Guest]: You know, economia is, of course, the study of the household wealth management, even though
[Guest]: most people don't realize it because we use the term economy, etc. so commonly that we
[Guest]: think it has something to do in this grand scheme of things.
[Guest]: But it's really at the grassroots, it's really about the household wealth management.
[Guest]: And the fact that what central banks were doing, what was happening across countries
[Guest]: on trade, etc., ultimately had its bearings in what was happening to the household demand
[Guest]: and consumption at the last mile.
[Guest]: I found that very, very appealing in some ways.
[Guest]: And then, you know, again, we had a family friend who had done a PhD in finance at New
[Guest]: York University Stern School of Business.
[Guest]: I spoke to him.
[Guest]: He said, you know, this is a very interesting subject, it can be very analytical, very mathematical
[Guest]: if you want.
[Guest]: It can be very applied and data oriented if you like.
[Guest]: You can be an academic if you like, or you could be in industry doing trading with stocks,
[Guest]: bonds, derivatives, whatever.
[Guest]: And I said, you know, let's take the plunge and we will see how it goes.
[Guest]: So it was too late by the time I left for my PhD in computer science.
[Guest]: So I did a one year sort of in computer science, but then I switched my major at NYU.
[Guest]: And it was a very interesting phase around 97, 98, when, you know, Southeast Asian crisis
[Guest]: happened, the Russian default happened, the largest hedge fund at that time, long term
[Guest]: capital management was about to fail.
[Guest]: And that was the time I realized that financial stability is actually very, very crucial to
[Guest]: an economy, that if your banks and financial firms are not in great shape, they could become
[Guest]: a source of huge deceleration in the growth of the economy.
[Guest]: And I always think of finance as the lifeblood of the economy.
[Guest]: Sometimes I think of central bank almost like the heart that's regulating the pumping of
[Guest]: these liquidity through various channels into the economy.
[Guest]: And if these banks, which you can sort of think about as, you know, the arteries along
[Guest]: the way, if they are clogged up, then you know, you can have problems in your organs,
[Guest]: you can have problems all the way to the heart also.
[Guest]: And so it dawned upon me that this is a fascinating aspect of economics and finance.
[Guest]: What role do banks play?
[Guest]: What role do other forms of financial sector firms play?
[Guest]: What is the role of the central bank?
[Guest]: Why is it that when banks and non-bank finance is not in great shape, economic outcomes thereafter
[Guest]: typically don't tend to be very good, as we have seen in India, for instance, over the
[Guest]: last decade.
[Guest]: So that gave me a direction in economics on my research.
[Guest]: And I've basically, I would say, stayed with that thought.
[Guest]: That is one thought that keeps crossing my mind over and over and over and over again.
[Guest]: There are so many shades to it that you can analyze, there is so much depth to that question.
[Guest]: And there are so many settings all over the world, because every economy is slightly different.
[Guest]: Every financial sector is slightly different.
[Guest]: You get different shocks that create these disturbances in a variety of settings.
[Guest]: So I did my research.
[Guest]: I went to London Business School.
[Guest]: I then came back to NYU.
[Guest]: You know, around the time I was finishing my PhD, Dr. Raghuram Rajan had just had, I
[Guest]: would say, his sort of fairly meteoric rise in the economics profession.
[Guest]: He was also studying banking and around that time also banking crises.
[Guest]: He then went on to become the chief economist of the IMF, the governor of the central bank.
[Guest]: But I think in a way, I would say he was probably the third important mentor, even though he
[Guest]: has never been my direct mentor, but I worked with him after my PhD, because I was at NYU,
[Guest]: Chicago.
[Guest]: But I think he has been a mentor more through setting sort of like a role model in the sense
[Guest]: that you know, coming from India, coming from engineering into economics, finance, working
[Guest]: in the field of banking, etc, that you know, you can make it, you know, it gives you a
[Guest]: little bit of confidence that you can break through these barriers and, you know, have
[Guest]: your own standing, so to speak, in the field.
[Guest]: And then the field is such the issue of financial stability, bank, central banking, that it's
[Guest]: a natural culmination for many people working in this area, who have a shot at a central
[Guest]: banking management position, because it allows you to apply your research, it allows you
[Guest]: a little bit to of course, learn things on the job that you can't learn in an academics
[Guest]: armchair.
[Guest]: And in some small way, I think, you know, give back to society.
[Guest]: And I said, you know, central bankers role is exactly what appealed me about economics
[Guest]: at one level.
[Guest]: Now, I always give this example, you're just turning this one interest rate dial, you know,
[Guest]: by 25 basis points, like point 25%.
[Guest]: And it is supposed to go and touch people in the economy.
[Guest]: Now, at some level, it looks kind of almost like a surreal thought, you know, that is
[Guest]: this really even possible?
[Guest]: But it does.
[Guest]: And sometimes it doesn't work.
[Guest]: And sometimes it does.
[Guest]: And I think it's very fascinating to understand what are the preconditions, so that sitting
[Guest]: in your macro offices, you can actually have some micro impact on on streets, such as the
[Guest]: street where I grew up.
[Guest]: So yeah, that's been the intellectual journey, I would say, several important teachers and
[Guest]: mentors or role models have been important, I think, the real life experiences of witnessing
[Guest]: financial crisis in their sort of wolf fury, so to speak, has been also very important
[Guest]: learning lesson.
[Guest]: And I think the stint at the Reserve Bank of India was was probably the best thing I
[Guest]: could have asked for, personally, because I spent time with my parents and lived with
[Guest]: them for two and a half years, professionally, because it is the closest I've been to executive
[Guest]: decision making in a policy role.
[Guest]: And because India is so complex, so interesting as an economy, and it's it really challenges
[Guest]: you to think through hard about what the right frameworks are and how to go about doing things
[Guest]: in a manner that you have more intended consequences rather than unintended consequences.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we proceed with your career, there are many fascinating strands in what
[Amit Varma]: you just said, which I kind of want to tease out and or you know, one of the interesting
[Amit Varma]: things which struck me when I was, you know, reading up on you is that, you know, economics
[Amit Varma]: is considered a dismal science.
[Amit Varma]: So most economists also considered fairly boring, straightforward kind of people, though
[Amit Varma]: I should tell my listeners that when Viral began this podcast, he had a baseball cap
[Amit Varma]: on with his headphone and t shirt.
[Amit Varma]: But we are not shooting any video.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the things that I'm going to ask you about later is, of course, a music
[Amit Varma]: album that you wrote and composed, Yadav Ke Silsile, which I was listening to earlier
[Amit Varma]: today, and also your passion for cricket.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you've used a metaphor of cricket a lot when you've been talking about the economy
[Amit Varma]: in the role of banks.
[Amit Varma]: And when you were talking about Dr. Rajan, it struck me that, you know, was he such into
[Amit Varma]: your dravid perhaps?
[Guest]: Oh, that's a great question. Yeah, see, cricket is because I kind of grew up on the streets
[Guest]: of Mumbai.
[Guest]: You know, we used to play on this first, we used to play, of course, in our living room
[Guest]: and hallway, we used to play on the terrace, you know, everyone in India is everything,
[Guest]: you do whatever the team requires, it was very creative, you know, we used to play on
[Guest]: the terrace.
[Guest]: And when the ball used to go down, we used to have this, the kite flying manja and firki.
[Guest]: So instead of the kite, we had a bag attached to it, and we used to roll the bag down, someone
[Guest]: would put the ball back in and you know, we would get the manja to get the ball back up.
[Guest]: Of course, we used to then play gully cricket, so you know, it will be night matches, floodlights
[Guest]: and all that.
[Guest]: So, you know, Jitekarwadi, Khetwadi, SK Patiludhia, and you know, all these places we used to
[Guest]: go with our team.
[Guest]: It was great fun.
[Guest]: I think it became sort of part of your DNA.
[Guest]: And of course, you watch cricket so much, you know, when we grew up, there weren't so
[Guest]: many channels, Darshan probably had like maybe a little bit of Chitrahaar and then maybe
[Guest]: the Saturday Marathi movie and the Sunday Hindi movie.
[Guest]: So you know, cricket, watching cricket and test matches was a very big part of the whole
[Guest]: sort of your pastime.
[Guest]: So I partly like to use the cricket analogies, besides them coming naturally to me is because
[Guest]: I think that's a way to connect to the common man.
[Guest]: And to me, that's very, very important.
[Guest]: Sometimes a few of the speeches I've given are so bare bones, that people in academia
[Guest]: sometimes feel when I gave these talks that, you know, does it really have to be so basic?
[Amit Varma]: Does it really?
[Guest]: And my sense is, it's a question of what your audience is, and are you connecting with the
[Guest]: audience or not?
[Guest]: You can't, there is no point using jargon and fancy terms and methods and techniques
[Guest]: when you know, you have to convey something much simpler to the common man.
[Guest]: But importantly, I think these being able to connect is equally important with people
[Guest]: at the top in mind.
[Guest]: I think even those who are doing very complex policy roles, they actually prefer when things
[Guest]: are explained in a very simple and transparent manner.
[Guest]: And I think that's why, you know, no analogy is perfect, but they work because when people
[Guest]: see it in a different light, when they can relate to it, they also start feeling that
[Guest]: maybe there is something like a common thread of a principle here, you know, they start
[Guest]: seeing that, oh, this is not about a very specific suggestion, maybe there is something
[Guest]: deeper that permeates across different disciplines of life.
[Guest]: So that's the reason why I would say I use the cricket analogy.
[Guest]: I think the Dravid analogy is one that's very close to my heart.
[Guest]: It's actually linked to a question that a good friend of mine from IIT Bombay asked
[Guest]: me just before, they had given me a send off before I went to Reserve Bank of India.
[Guest]: So we met at one restaurant outside our place in Manhattan called Heroes, it's a Greek food
[Guest]: place.
[Guest]: And I distinctly remember about 10 of them had come down and we sat together and one
[Guest]: of them, my very good friend, he asked me, so who would be your role model as a central
[Guest]: banker?
[Guest]: Is it Ben Bernanke?
[Guest]: Is it Paul Walker?
[Guest]: Is it Janet Yellen?
[Guest]: And I said, no, it's going to be Rahul Dravid.
[Guest]: And I really genuinely mean it because I always thought he was the pillar of the Indian batting
[Guest]: order during his time, the rock bed, sheet anchor, whatever term you want to use.
[Guest]: There were so many test matches I remember watching where, you know, the entire team
[Guest]: would bat around him.
[Guest]: And because I think of the central bank as a little bit of this heart that is regulating
[Guest]: all this pushing of lifeblood to the economy, I think that that is the role that is best
[Guest]: captured, I think, in cricket by Rahul Dravid.
[Guest]: In fact, and, you know, I think, as I said, financial stability is very important.
[Guest]: I think it's most important that you need someone with that persistence, with that discipline
[Guest]: and with that single minded focus of holding the guard when, you know, the situation is
[Guest]: looking tricky.
[Guest]: You know, when some of the arteries, some of the banks are blocked, not doing very well.
[Guest]: In fact, if you remember, in one of his last series in England, which we lost, I think
[Guest]: 3-0.
[Guest]: No, he scored three centuries because he was the only one holding up one end and giving
[Guest]: some hope that we might actually at least come out with a draw.
[Guest]: So I think that's very important.
[Guest]: I think, you know, and it's everything, you know, taking the stance, knowing where your
[Guest]: off stump is, leaving a lot of balls outside the off stump.
[Guest]: I think this is what the central bank has to do most of the time.
[Guest]: I think there's a lot of bad ideas.
[Guest]: I can't tell you how bad some of the ideas are in policymaking.
[Guest]: Somehow there is this one feature that because economics is so rooted everywhere in each
[Guest]: household's policymaking, and of course, the households are making sometimes the most interesting
[Guest]: decisions.
[Guest]: There is also this perception, though, that we don't need to acquire any expertise in
[Guest]: this field.
[Guest]: Everyone can just go walk into these policy roles and start doing things.
[Guest]: Now, of course, there will be some talented people who are so smart by their training
[Guest]: on the ground that they can do it.
[Guest]: But you know, however imperfect and however young as a field, you know, economics is not
[Guest]: even 100 years old in some sense as a discipline.
[Guest]: So it's a relatively young field, but however young and imperfect it might be, it is still
[Guest]: a field.
[Guest]: And there are some principles and ideas that seem to show up in different countries in
[Guest]: different conditions on a very regular and robust basis.
[Guest]: And so a big part of the central banking is just not dealing with bad ideas.
[Guest]: It's these balls which are outside the off stump.
[Guest]: So I think that's the sort of Rahul Dravid part of it.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think Raghuram Rajan in some ways, I think you could, you could be, you are right.
[Guest]: I think he could be Tendulkar, but my sense is he's also probably taken a fairly long
[Guest]: term view, I think, during his time as central banking, you know, moves such as the beginning
[Guest]: the steps towards inflation targeting framework in India, then, you know, creating a differentiated
[Guest]: banking system, opening up bank licenses.
[Guest]: And third, you know, creating this database Krillic as a repository for information on
[Guest]: large corporates.
[Guest]: I think all of these were fairly long term moves, actually.
[Guest]: So I would say by and large, you know, to use another example, maybe he's like Rahul
[Guest]: Dravid, but he also has Virat Kohli's aggression at times.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm also a big fan of Dravid, of course, and you're absolutely right.
[Amit Varma]: If you look at all of India's important test wins overseas in that particular decade, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Headingley, Adelaide, Rawalpindi, the series we won in the Western days, Dravid
[Amit Varma]: was completely at the heart of it.
[Amit Varma]: I'd save the question for later.
[Amit Varma]: But since you, you know, brought up that subject, I'll kind of ask it now, which is you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about the importance of, you know, communicating ideas and sort of keeping it simple.
[Amit Varma]: And I, you know, I teach an online writing course, where sometimes students will ask
[Amit Varma]: me that, listen, you know, I do academic writing, and people in academics expect the kind of
[Amit Varma]: a certain kind of jargon and a certain kind of signaling and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And my response to all of that is that in any context, clear writing is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: I can understand that sometimes there are those imperatives where people will expect
[Amit Varma]: you to use language that puts them in their comfort zone, but as clear as possible is
[Amit Varma]: always a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: And the imperative of, you know, writing clearly makes you think more clearly, because if you're
[Amit Varma]: stating something in simpler language, as you do throughout in your book, then you're
[Amit Varma]: forced to put that kind of thought into it.
[Amit Varma]: But my broader question, which I wanted to come to was that, you know, when you wrote
[Amit Varma]: this book, one of the reasons that you said for writing this book was that you wanted
[Amit Varma]: to start a debate that you felt very deeply that these issues which you're talking about
[Amit Varma]: financial stability, fiscal dominance, they are of great importance, they should not only
[Amit Varma]: be debated by policy people, the public at large should understand them and sort of talk
[Amit Varma]: about them, which is an incredible aim.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, it struck me, and this is something that, you know, people who write
[Amit Varma]: about economics have been saying forever, that, you know, a lot of the fundamental ideas
[Amit Varma]: of economics are deeply counterintuitive, you know, spontaneous order, positive, some
[Amit Varma]: game, how complex systems work.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, you know, there is both bounded rationality, which and what public choice
[Amit Varma]: there is called rational ignorance, that for a common person to put in the effort to understand
[Amit Varma]: the economy, as it were, it's probably just too much of an effort, it's much easier to
[Amit Varma]: pick a political side, which everybody more or less has.
[Amit Varma]: And then you go with whatever that side is doing, you defend what they're doing.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're not with them, then you attack what they're doing, which is how most of our
[Amit Varma]: public discourse is today.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you approach that challenge?
[Amit Varma]: Because these are not easy ideas to sort of, you know, grasp for, you know, a lay person.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what were the thoughts that I mean, you've used cricketing analogies and
[Amit Varma]: all that, and that's worked beautifully and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But is that something you consciously thought about that?
[Amit Varma]: How can I communicate this?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: And see, the important thing to realize in policymaking is that, see, over certain functions,
[Guest]: the central bank probably is given legislative autonomy.
[Guest]: So what I mean is that, think about the inflation targeting framework, it is actually by an
[Guest]: act of law as an amendment to the Reserve Bank of India Act, that the central bank through
[Guest]: this Monetary Policy Committee can set the interest rate, this is the objective function
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: But in many other functions of the central bank, the operational autonomy is very loosely
[Guest]: defined.
[Guest]: A lot of the decisions, especially in India, as I explain in the book, given the presence
[Guest]: of public sector banks and other public sector financial institutions, are very often taken
[Guest]: either jointly with the government through some discussion, conversation, consensus.
[Guest]: Or if the central bank has to even take certain decisions, the government has to empower the
[Guest]: central bank through some legislative changes.
[Guest]: Now, why am I saying all this?
[Guest]: What I'm trying to convey is that for many good policy decisions to be taken, politics
[Guest]: has to be aligned with the economics.
[Guest]: The government has to want what makes sense in the long run for the economy as a whole.
[Guest]: Now, a fundamental thesis of my work, the book, as well as the Rahul Dravid analogy
[Guest]: is that there are pressures sometimes to actually not play the long test match.
[Guest]: There are pressures to instead play T20, you know, to go and entertain the crowds instead
[Guest]: of actually winning session by session through endurance.
[Guest]: And because the political decision making can often be very geared by the short term
[Guest]: consideration and you put it exactly right, why is it that short term growth will actually
[Guest]: give them political gains?
[Guest]: It's because the average person on the street may not be able to figure out that the short
[Guest]: term boost in activity, either because they are getting a lot of credit, or the government
[Guest]: is distributing a lot of cash through a variety of schemes, that that short term activity
[Guest]: is down the line, at some future point of time in three or five years time, going to
[Guest]: come back with a lot of costs because maybe the loans that were made were made without
[Guest]: due diligence, or the cash that has been distributed is going to be very hard to repay down the
[Guest]: line.
[Guest]: Now, so sometimes in the common man, both because of them having to work so hard on
[Guest]: their own economics, and perhaps because of limits to information processing and rational
[Guest]: evaluation of data and you know, I think the counterfactuals, what if that is the key question
[Guest]: that you have to ask in policymaking, what if this were to happen?
[Guest]: Those things are not always very easy for the common man to perceive.
[Guest]: And if they can't, in a way that creates the opportunity for the short termism to actually
[Guest]: lead to gains, that if I do this pump priming of the economy, it can actually lead to some
[Guest]: benefits during the electoral cycle.
[Guest]: Now, if that is not in the long run interest of the economy, in my view, those who can
[Guest]: actually perceive what the impact of these short term pump priming of the economy is,
[Guest]: those who are in the job, such as at a central bank, where your objectives are enshrined
[Guest]: in the law to be long term protecting depositor interest, keeping price stability, guarding
[Guest]: the value of the rupee, etc.
[Guest]: All of these require sometimes making short term sacrifices, so that you know, you keep
[Guest]: the ship afloat and in good condition.
[Guest]: So I think it is the responsibility in my view of the central banker to actually use
[Guest]: communication as one of the tools to advance the public discussion.
[Guest]: And therefore, I think it has to go to the common man as well.
[Guest]: I think it's not good enough that it reaches the circles of finance industry, bankers,
[Guest]: market participants.
[Guest]: You have to try and get it into mainstream media as much as possible.
[Guest]: And I think the reason is that once you shift the public debate, once you create a demand
[Guest]: for the right long term reforms in people themselves, then the politics and economics,
[Guest]: there's a greater chance that you will align.
[Guest]: See, sometimes politics aligns with economics because, you know, there may be a situation
[Guest]: where the government has no choice, but to do the right thing for the long run, because
[Guest]: otherwise, investors will not give you money, like think of 1991 liberalization moment,
[Guest]: it was a moment where structural changes to the Indian economy were thrust upon us by
[Guest]: the IMF, because we needed their support, and there was no other way out.
[Guest]: So that's one way to go.
[Guest]: But you know, reforms do happen all the time.
[Guest]: Sometimes they happen promptly, sometimes they happen with delay.
[Guest]: And why do we get these moments where the political consensus arises to undertake these
[Guest]: reforms?
[Guest]: Very often, I think it's because there is a demand for reforms in the common man's mind,
[Guest]: in the common man's perception, in media, on television, in print media, now in podcast,
[Guest]: Twitter, whatever it is.
[Guest]: But you sometimes get this good ideas being planted, seeded, and then they're sort of
[Guest]: germinating and rising to the top of an agenda.
[Guest]: And as long as there's a critical mass of discussion around the right ideas, I think
[Guest]: there's a greater chance that the politics and economics will align.
[Guest]: I think we need to create more such opportunities.
[Guest]: And to do that, we can't just wait and watch.
[Guest]: I think we have to plant these seeds of ideas, very often, the ideas germinate, and they
[Guest]: are not even associated with you.
[Guest]: And I think that's perfectly all right.
[Guest]: I think you are just trying to get people to debate because very often the person who
[Guest]: comes up with the original idea and plants the seed may not have the right solution.
[Guest]: Maybe he or she doesn't actually appreciate all the realities of the political economy.
[Guest]: But once the idea is debated, maybe a better solution emerges.
[Guest]: But to me, this is absolutely crucial.
[Guest]: Policymakers have to communicate, they have to communicate with the common man, besides
[Guest]: the more sophisticated parts in their relevant sphere of influence.
[Guest]: And I think this is the way change comes about.
[Guest]: So I think to cut a long story short, I think Amit, what I'm trying to say is that while
[Guest]: it's true that there is bounded rationality, there is limited processing of information.
[Guest]: And of course, decision making is very concentrated, but we have to build a bridge between these
[Guest]: two.
[Guest]: We have to get people to come a bit closer to the decision makers in terms of their discussions
[Guest]: and debates.
[Guest]: We have to get the decision makers closer to the common man by alerting them about the
[Guest]: long run consequences of some of the policies and why some things make sense and others
[Guest]: don't.
[Guest]: And I think how do you bring them together?
[Guest]: I think your communication is one of the kind of almost, it's a negotiating tool, actually.
[Guest]: You're bringing these two parties, which often seem far apart, together through public debate
[Guest]: and discussion.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I think this is a very crucial role.
[Guest]: And I think I'm seeing this also in the modern day central bankers.
[Guest]: I'm not on social media myself as a policy, but I can see that many central bankers are
[Guest]: now actually using even social media to have an outreach of their ideas.
[Guest]: Many central banks are now actually, quote unquote, organizing panels and sessions at
[Guest]: industry events or academic conferences because they want actually to be part of the broader
[Guest]: discussion and debate.
[Guest]: So I think over three to four decades, we seem to have moved away from a very boring,
[Guest]: quiet central banker to a somewhat, I wouldn't necessarily say outspoken always, but sometimes
[Guest]: even outspoken.
[Guest]: But certainly, I would say communicative and interactive central banker who's using communication
[Guest]: as a very, very important tool, both for this negotiation function, as I mentioned, between
[Guest]: politics, common man and economics.
[Guest]: And I think also to actually explain what they are doing, because that gives them a
[Guest]: democratic accountability of their actions, you know, because in many cases, central bankers
[Guest]: are technocrats.
[Guest]: They are taking very technical decisions.
[Guest]: As I said, what is this changing of this dial of 25 basis points or 0.25% of interest rates.
[Guest]: But if you can communicate and explain this well to the common man, that increases your
[Guest]: democratic accountability from the technocratic decisions that you are taking.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the challenge of doing that is something that I've been, you know, discussing
[Amit Varma]: with friends for ages now, because a lot of my friends work in the policy sphere, where
[Amit Varma]: they'll work with politicians and bureaucrats and try to sell policies.
[Amit Varma]: And my point to them always has been that, you know, if you think of the political marketplace,
[Amit Varma]: you have to focus on the demand and not the supply and that politicians will respond to
[Amit Varma]: incentives.
[Amit Varma]: So if you can change the demand, and then you have people who demand something different,
[Amit Varma]: then you're far more likely to get those sort of outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, again, Andrew Breitbart once said politics is downstream of culture, which
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, again, that whole act of changing the culture, seeding these ideas, like you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out is a decades long game.
[Amit Varma]: You saw it in America with, you know, Goldwater losing in 64.
[Amit Varma]: And then Reagan coming to power in 80, it takes many, many sort of years to play out.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to you know, the specifics of the Indian economy and your time in the Reserve
[Amit Varma]: Bank of India, I'd also like to just for a moment, get some more background on where
[Amit Varma]: you're sort of coming from.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we are essentially the same age, I think I'm a couple of months older than you.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, this was a question that first struck me when I read about your journey,
[Amit Varma]: that I kind of spent a certain part of my childhood in pre liberalization, India.
[Amit Varma]: And then my adulthood is in liberalization, India.
[Amit Varma]: And it so happened, my dad was in the IAS.
[Amit Varma]: So I was, of course, steeped in the received wisdom of that Fabian socialist era, where
[Amit Varma]: your state is your my bop.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where you look at the economy.
[Amit Varma]: And then you're an adult and sort of the blinkers fall off one by one and you see everything
[Amit Varma]: kind of differently.
[Amit Varma]: What was your sort of intellectual evolution through that period like?
[Amit Varma]: What you know, did your notion of your country and what we were doing right and what we were
[Amit Varma]: doing wrong?
[Amit Varma]: Did your idea of India, as it were, you know, evolve during that period, especially for
[Amit Varma]: example, when you went abroad, it must have given you that distance where, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: can be a little more objective about it, you can contrast it with what you see around you.
[Amit Varma]: Take me a bit through your sort of mindset and your idea of India as it were how it evolved
[Guest]: in that period.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I think, you know, as a child, maybe even in my school, college, perhaps even IIT days,
[Guest]: I wasn't so clear about what exactly India was relative to the rest of the world with
[Guest]: great clarity.
[Guest]: Of course, what was very hard not to notice was the fact that it seemed very heavily controlled
[Guest]: and administered economy certainly until the early 90s.
[Guest]: It seemed like everyone had very few career choices.
[Guest]: So there clearly weren't too many thriving industries in the country.
[Guest]: And you knew from all the, you know, the great demand for imported goods, smuggled or otherwise,
[Guest]: that people in the rest of the world were producing goods that were far better than
[Guest]: were produced in India.
[Guest]: And so, you kind of knew something at the back of your mind that, you know, that something
[Guest]: is not happening right, though you can't kind of put your finger on it yet, you know, that
[Guest]: why is everyone wanting everything that's produced abroad?
[Guest]: And then I think when I first came to the United States, I saw the extent of variety
[Guest]: of produce of various types, the efficiency of customer service on the ground, the sheer
[Guest]: buzz and activity in the economy, etc.
[Guest]: I kind of realized that this is a very different manner in which the economy is organized.
[Guest]: And then you suddenly started realizing that at a deeper level, all countries are somewhere
[Guest]: on a continuum of, you know, sort of like pure capitalism and at the very extreme communism.
[Guest]: And you know, different countries, depending upon the policies they choose at a given point
[Guest]: of time are actually shifting their position on this.
[Guest]: And you know, that happens, including China, which started off at the very extreme, but
[Guest]: now has embraced certain kinds of market reforms, versus, say, United States, which used to
[Guest]: be a lot more capitalistic at one stage, but increasingly, people think that, for example,
[Guest]: its entire housing market risk is socialized through the guarantee programs that it has.
[Guest]: It thinks that it has given way to very concentrated power in certain sectors.
[Guest]: And, you know, maybe there's some forms of crony capitalism also coming in, in some guise
[Guest]: or the other.
[Guest]: So, you know, countries are always shifting their positions along the spectrum.
[Guest]: And then, so that's how, so I don't, so, you know, my view of countries is that each country
[Guest]: is unique.
[Guest]: Each country has its own preconditions, which are very important in shaping the ideology
[Guest]: that the people have, as we were discussing, sometimes this ideology itself needs to be
[Guest]: shifted or change to happen.
[Guest]: So the initial conditions are important, because they have left a legacy of ideologies in people's
[Guest]: minds.
[Guest]: But in some ways, they are also on the spectrum.
[Guest]: And you can actually think about them, understand them, understand the outcomes, the policy
[Guest]: choices by actually using economics to understand, then what kind of policies get accepted, when
[Guest]: is a country more likely to embrace capitalism, when is it more likely to regress towards
[Guest]: inward looking protectionism, combined with, you know, socialism or at the very extreme
[Guest]: sort of communist kind of policies.
[Guest]: But the idea that really struck me the most was actually this idea of Austrian economists,
[Guest]: you know, Hayek most, because he also was very closer to finance, but to an extent also
[Guest]: von Mises and others, that what too much state control of the factors of production does
[Guest]: in the end, is that it makes the individual essentially lose his or her entrepreneurial
[Guest]: spirit.
[Guest]: Because you know, that even if you are entrepreneurial, there are so many barriers to entry, there
[Guest]: are so many regulations, licensing, etc, to go through.
[Guest]: And at an extreme, you're not even allowed because the entire sector may be nationalized,
[Guest]: and you don't even have private entry that's allowed.
[Guest]: And that just chokes the individualism, it chokes the entrepreneurial spirit of the individuals.
[Guest]: And when I read about this, of course, Hayek, you know, in his most, one of his most famous
[Guest]: books is titled The Road to Serfdom.
[Guest]: And he's basically saying, you know, you're going to be producing serfs, when you adopt
[Guest]: these kinds of centralized decision making policies.
[Guest]: And that appealed to me a lot, that over long stretches of time, having too much control
[Guest]: through the center is ultimately going to kill off entrepreneurship, innovation, enterprise.
[Guest]: And that became an idea that when you are going through a situation like the Great Depression
[Guest]: or the Great Recession, you need the state to play an important role to kickstart investments,
[Guest]: kickstart job creation, you know, give a softer landing to the economy, while it is good,
[Guest]: it should only be interpreted as something that you should do as a temporary stopgap
[Guest]: stimulus quick.
[Guest]: And you know, even, even a short stimulus can go pretty bad, as we know, but at a minimum,
[Guest]: it has to be seen as a temporary arrangement.
[Guest]: Because if that becomes the permanent style of the economy, that the government tries
[Guest]: to do more and more and more, then you will have less and less and less of the private
[Guest]: sector because their enterprise is actually getting killed.
[Guest]: And actually, in a subtle way, while I'm not so explicit in linking it to the Austrian
[Guest]: economists in my book, that has always been at the back of my mind, that, you know, I
[Guest]: have these one, there's the Eddie Schroff Memorial Lecture in the book, which is on
[Guest]: the central bank's independence.
[Guest]: And then the last speech in the book is actually on how governments crowd out and have focus
[Guest]: there on finance.
[Guest]: But when an individual loses the entrepreneurial spirit, that is actually crowding out, because
[Guest]: that that entrepreneurial spirit has no role in the in a nationalized or very heavily centralized
[Guest]: economy.
[Guest]: And to me, this is a key theme of our times right now, in my view, because what has happened
[Guest]: is the slowdown of global economic growth, especially post the global financial crisis,
[Guest]: though many would contend this was happening even before in 90s and early 2000s.
[Guest]: But this slowdown has created a chain of events in which more and more is being done by the
[Guest]: governments.
[Guest]: The government balance sheets the world over are getting bloated, they are spending a lot,
[Guest]: they are trying to take over significant parts of job creation, subsidies, guarantees, risk
[Guest]: taking on their balance sheets.
[Guest]: In fact, many in the United States think that increasingly, most financial sector risks
[Guest]: are now socialized, whereas the gains remain privatized.
[Guest]: And what this has done is that I think we really risk the fear, we really risk the prospect
[Guest]: of and we have to fear that prospect that we lose actually the entrepreneurial spirit
[Guest]: of the global economy.
[Guest]: The idea that the best solutions cannot come in the administrative bureaucratic offices
[Guest]: of the government, where only a small part of the economy sits there, you know, the millions
[Guest]: are actually out there on the streets, in their homes, they are the ones where the brightest
[Guest]: minds are likely to be for a specific idea.
[Guest]: And if we don't find a channel for these entrepreneurial ideas to form shape, you know, for them to
[Guest]: organize themselves as businesses, maybe fail, but fail fast and restart, or many of them
[Guest]: succeed to becoming the best enterprises going forward.
[Guest]: I don't see how we can arrest the slide we are seeing in the global growth and productivity.
[Guest]: So at a very deep macro level, I think this is the shift that has happened, it has become
[Guest]: more pronounced since the global financial crisis.
[Guest]: My view is that India is also undergoing such a shift.
[Guest]: We were very nationalized and centralized until the late 80s, then we liberalized, we
[Guest]: also had a big set of divestment reforms during 98 to 2003.
[Guest]: But my sense is the policy responses since the global financial crisis are in line with
[Guest]: the rest of the world in the sense that we have now also moved towards greater and greater
[Guest]: centralization of the economy.
[Guest]: What doesn't help us is that our initial conditions feature already a big presence of the state
[Guest]: in many, many sectors, even non-strategic sectors, we have a big presence of the government
[Guest]: in the form of public sector banks, public sector owned insurance companies and power
[Guest]: finance companies, etc.
[Guest]: So again, on this spectrum, I see India increasingly regressing a bit towards more centrally controlled
[Guest]: economy and not relinquishing actually the control.
[Guest]: And the fear I have is that this is going to crowd out the private sector.
[Guest]: I think, in my view, the reason why private investments in India are not high, it's not
[Guest]: just because we had a bad loans problem, yes, we did have a very severe bad loans problem
[Guest]: because of the fiscal stimulus of 9 to 11, 12.
[Guest]: And you know, those sectors are still not fully back up.
[Guest]: But I think one big reason why private investments are low is because costs of borrowing are
[Guest]: very, very high, cost of capital is very high.
[Guest]: And why is the cost of capital very high is because so much of the savings in the economy
[Guest]: are borrowed by the government itself.
[Guest]: And so I would say both as someone who grew up during the nationalized era without any
[Guest]: clear thinking, but with a lot of questions at the back of your mind, then someone who
[Guest]: witnessed what used to be a very open capitalist society in the United States.
[Guest]: And you know, I spent seven years in London between 2008.
[Guest]: And that was the time I realized that everything is on a spectrum.
[Guest]: Because when I observed the European economies, I realized it's all on the spectrum.
[Guest]: But having seen this global experience, I think this is the theme that I would say has
[Guest]: struck me the most, which is what is the right balance between the government, the private
[Guest]: sector, the banks and the central bank?
[Guest]: Can you ensure that all four wheels are moving in tandem and together with no attempt to
[Guest]: drive the car entirely on just one wheel?
[Guest]: Because you know, if you do that, there is only so far that your journey will take you.
[Amit Varma]: So I've just realized that we are not just united in our admiration for Dravid, it's
[Amit Varma]: also an admiration for Hayek.
[Amit Varma]: But so I'll digress a bit and I want to spend a lot of time talking about your book and
[Amit Varma]: your insights in it, of course, but I'll continue digressing a bit and a thought that kind of
[Amit Varma]: struck me as you were, you know, going through this narrative of how your thinking changed
[Amit Varma]: and yet, how the world has moved in a certain kind of direction is that it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: one of the great battles in our times is not a battle about what ideas work and what ideas
[Amit Varma]: don't work.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, it is a battle about what narrative sells and what narrative doesn't sell.
[Amit Varma]: For example, after the 2008 financial crisis, if you ask most people what happened, they
[Amit Varma]: will say, oh, it's a private sector is greedy bankers.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as you've spoken about it yourself, you know, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had a
[Amit Varma]: big part to play in that the incentives that were there by the government, perhaps you
[Amit Varma]: can go back to 1977 and talk about the Community Reinvestment Act, a lot of it was the overbearing
[Amit Varma]: oppressive hand of government, which created those terrible incentives, and led to those
[Amit Varma]: players behaving in the ways that they did.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I've always found it dubious that, you know, when Americans say that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, losses are being socialized, profits are being privatized, absolutely right.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that should not be the case, you create a moral hazard there, you create
[Amit Varma]: the wrong incentives.
[Amit Varma]: But the broader point is that, despite the fact that everything that's been happening
[Amit Varma]: across the world, all the economic failures, all the political failures that I see, are
[Amit Varma]: in some way or the other, linked to the role of the state and the incentives that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, they are setting.
[Amit Varma]: And yet the dominant narrative is everywhere that it is greedy capitalists, and the state
[Amit Varma]: is a solution and the state needs to sort of clamp down and instead of Hayek, who is
[Amit Varma]: almost again, a forgotten man today, you have Keynesian ideas, again, taking center stage.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that you think about, because on the one hand, you would like to imagine
[Amit Varma]: that, look, you know, you pick the ideas that work, you go through history, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: see everything play out, you figure out what works and what doesn't, you go for what works.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, it's not the idea that works, it's a narrative that sells that is on the ascendant.
[Guest]: Does this worry you?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: It worries me a lot.
[Guest]: And I think, but there's also a challenge in there, as we were discussing earlier, Amit,
[Guest]: which is that, see, why does the narrative of a Keynesian stimulus or state control during
[Guest]: a financial crisis or while coming out of a very deep recession work is because actually
[Guest]: even conceptually, and in theory, there is good rationale for that to be the case.
[Guest]: Because you know, there is what economists call as a market failure, which is that, you
[Guest]: know, in a financial crisis, what happens to say one bank is going to have such a bad
[Guest]: influence all over the system, that or if a large number of firms fail, you know, the
[Guest]: recession or house foreclosures, they are all going to affect adversely the rest of
[Guest]: the economy.
[Guest]: So there is a good theoretical rationale, and it works.
[Guest]: What is not well appreciated is that, but there are conditions in which this begins
[Guest]: to start doing harm, because of political capture of the government presence in decision
[Guest]: making by, say, crony capitalists, second, they could just be outright short termism
[Guest]: on part of the governments.
[Guest]: And third, there could be massive crowding out effects, including of the individualism
[Guest]: and entrepreneurial spirit, leave aside just higher borrowing costs for private sector
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So I think what happens is that it's very appealing to describe these narratives as
[Guest]: one zero.
[Guest]: So, you know, you find that individuals are either all entirely pro capitalism, or you
[Guest]: see individuals who are entirely pro socialism, and you know, everything being done by the
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: But the reality is that what works best is if you are nimble about the state of the world,
[Guest]: which is based on your economic conditions, how much balance you need to put between these
[Guest]: two extreme positions, because as we were discussing, clearly, in a financial crisis,
[Guest]: you need the government to actually backstop and get the system back up.
[Guest]: But then there should be a graceful unwinding of the extra government imprint that got created.
[Guest]: Now that second part is always missing whenever the governments are stepping up their positions,
[Guest]: you know, part of it is, you know, the fact that it's easy to sell a one zero idea than
[Guest]: to be nuanced and balanced and say, oh, we'll do this now.
[Guest]: But you know, in three or five years, when things come down, we will, we will withdraw.
[Guest]: Second very important constraint is that very often, the stimulus decisions are taken by
[Guest]: one government.
[Guest]: And even if they were to put in place a decision to withdraw down the line, that is going to
[Guest]: have to be implemented by another government.
[Guest]: Now, whatever the first government has announced may not be binding on the second government
[Guest]: for doing this.
[Guest]: And you could also get this kind of then possibly a populist trap, which is that once one government
[Guest]: does this as a stimulus, the other governments want to keep on with it, because it allows
[Guest]: them to continuously do the short term priming of the economy to show that they will look
[Guest]: good.
[Guest]: So but I want to come back to the challenge.
[Guest]: What is the challenge?
[Guest]: The challenge to me is that we need to have a more balanced debate about these issues.
[Guest]: Whenever the stimulus packages are announced, we need to simultaneously assess their costs.
[Guest]: We need to think about their long run consequences.
[Guest]: And we need a lot more discussion, transparency, accountability, in my view, of these packages.
[Guest]: And conversely, sometimes, when you are too much in what looks like a capitalist society,
[Guest]: very often, seeds are being sown either for crony capitalism, or for banks and the financial
[Guest]: sectors taking on too much risk, which ultimately, the governments will have to backstop if the
[Guest]: entire system collapses, because you'll have to protect the depositors in the end.
[Guest]: And so you also need to guard against that.
[Guest]: And so it's all about, I think, striking the right balance.
[Guest]: And you know, giving a balanced perspective is by and large not easy to gain popularity
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: And I think that's where I think so the challenge is that, from a political standpoint, I think
[Guest]: it is easy to give one zero narratives, because that creates more polarization, and might
[Guest]: give you enough median voter outcomes that are desirable for you.
[Guest]: I think the job of the accountants, the think tanks, the economists, the policymakers, the
[Guest]: independent policymakers, the technocrats, I think their job, in my view, is to continue
[Guest]: to push the dialogue so that you make it clear, listen, it's not one zero, it's about striking
[Guest]: the right balance.
[Guest]: And this balance shifts a little bit in different points of time, based on what kind of situation
[Guest]: in your banking crisis, yes, the central bank, and the government need to do more.
[Guest]: But once you move away from that, the role of these two has to diminish.
[Guest]: And you have to let the private sector flourish again, while recognizing that you don't want
[Guest]: sort of another full fledged financial crisis again.
[Guest]: In some ways, actually, this is what financial stability to me is all about.
[Guest]: It's about allowing the system to flourish privately, while safeguarding that in a stress
[Guest]: scenario, it will have the right levels of resistance.
[Guest]: And so the if I could just end with an example here, which is the example I like a lot in
[Guest]: thinking about financial stability, and in general, this balance between market friendly
[Guest]: versus government centered policies is, is really about building a bridge.
[Guest]: See, I think of financial sector as basically a bridge that carries savings from one shore
[Guest]: across to borrowers on the other side, you know, the bridge, artery, whatever you want
[Guest]: to call it.
[Guest]: Now, how do the engineers approach the construction of the bridges?
[Guest]: So yeah, there are standards.
[Guest]: And what are these standards?
[Guest]: The standards are that you should be able to withstand some fairly high cyclonic hurricane
[Guest]: kind of winds.
[Guest]: Now, that is not the normal outcome.
[Guest]: If you left a private constructor entirely to do this by themselves, they may not put
[Guest]: in the adequate number of trusses and extra robustness in the bridge.
[Guest]: But there are some protection or safety standards that ensure that when the situation is going
[Guest]: to be bad, and you still need the bridge to actually stand there, either to transport
[Guest]: that time itself or to be available right after the cyclone has gone away.
[Guest]: You need that robustness investment to be made ahead of time.
[Guest]: And my sense is that if we took this approach, which is that we let the system function most
[Guest]: of the time, with the individual's entrepreneurial spirit, but we create defenses, so that when
[Guest]: things go bad, the mop up by the governments, the central banks, etc, doesn't have to be
[Guest]: heavy handed, because you've already built so much robustness in the system, that it's
[Guest]: only in the very extreme wind conditions that the bridge might collapse, then of course,
[Guest]: you need to reconstruct, or that you will have to do minimal repairs, because actually
[Guest]: your bridge was so strong to start with.
[Guest]: I think this is the shift in mindset that is required.
[Guest]: It requires thinking long term.
[Guest]: It requires entertaining stress scenarios that are not your present day challenge.
[Guest]: And it requires making some sacrifices, you're going to have to increase the cost of production
[Guest]: of the bridge.
[Guest]: It cannot be built as quickly as you thought would be built otherwise.
[Guest]: But I very much see the role of the economists, think tanks, policy makers, analysts as so
[Guest]: important in the current times, when everyone is going for one zero narratives, that we
[Guest]: need to bring the discussion towards it being about a better balance.
[Guest]: And one that is based on the conditions and the needs of the economy at a given point
[Guest]: of time, without disregarding what will be the consequences of the policies you adopt
[Guest]: now down the line.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm loving your metaphors in this episode, the heart and the arteries of bridge.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I thought, you know, when you said that, you know, you had one way of explaining
[Amit Varma]: this, I thought you're going to talk about Dravid's innings in that famous test in Headingley,
[Amit Varma]: where he saw out the new ball and made that phenomenal hundred on day one, partly with
[Amit Varma]: Sanjay Bangar and then the next day, Tendulkar and Ganguly made big hundreds.
[Amit Varma]: And if you just look at the scorecard, it's like, okay, they all made hundreds, what's
[Amit Varma]: a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: But Dravid sort of weathered the storm and then the other guys thrived.
[Amit Varma]: So with a bridge, I would say that for me, where that analogy kinds of falls apart is
[Amit Varma]: that this particular bridge that you're talking about has so many moving parts, and all of
[Amit Varma]: them have their own incentives that it's just incredibly complex.
[Amit Varma]: I guess no metaphor is perfect.
[Amit Varma]: You know, before we, you know, get to the book and the, you know, the meat of our discussion
[Amit Varma]: today, a final digressive question, which again, comes from an aside in your book, I
[Amit Varma]: think, and also something you said a while back, where you were talking about your personal
[Amit Varma]: journey, and you pointed out how countries are sort of placed along this continuum.
[Amit Varma]: And where a country is on the continuum can often shape how its people think about the
[Amit Varma]: world and their worldviews.
[Amit Varma]: And one sort of, you know, thought that I've been sort of toying with for a long, long
[Amit Varma]: time is how institutions can shape a culture in very deep ways, like Jagdish Bhagwati had
[Amit Varma]: once, you know, I think in the year 2000, contrasted China and India and pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that look, China is profit seeking, India is rent seeking, there's a rent seeking mentality.
[Amit Varma]: People don't think of how can I serve the other person and make some profit, they think
[Amit Varma]: about how can I exploit the person, how can I, you know, exploit the situation.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense of why that is, and you know, it's a speculation, is that it is partly because
[Amit Varma]: of our institutions, because of the way our government was set up over the last seven
[Amit Varma]: decades since independence that we are essentially a rent seeking society, the role of the state
[Amit Varma]: for much of this time has been vastly oversized.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the incentives for a person would always be that be part of the state
[Amit Varma]: be part of that entity that has a monopoly on violence and so much discretion.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where you'll make the money.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, within the book somewhere, again, I didn't mark that passage, so I don't remember
[Amit Varma]: the exact words, but you've similarly spoken about how the structures within the financial
[Amit Varma]: system can shape the culture and the attitudes of, you know, the players involved.
[Guest]: What are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm, I'm very much a fan of this view, both parts of your question, one that it is
[Guest]: about institutions in the end, that the long term outcomes of the country, I'm a big, I
[Guest]: think I'm convinced by the research of Simoglu, Robinson, Fukuyama, and others that, you know,
[Guest]: in the end, countries that become like Denmark in their quality of living over a period of
[Guest]: time, and are able to offer that standard of living to its citizenry are countries where
[Guest]: institutions such as the rule of law, enforcement of contracts, sanctity of the elections, etc,
[Guest]: are in good shape.
[Guest]: In fact, in the A.D. Shroff Memorial Lecture, I, my attempt was to say that even a central
[Guest]: bank should actually be viewed as on the same pedestal as all these other institutions in
[Guest]: a democracy.
[Guest]: It's an important part of checks and balances, just the way we would not want the Judiciary
[Guest]: or the Election Commission to be compromised in a democracy, we should also not want that,
[Guest]: you know, the central bank is actually compromised in its decision making just for the short
[Guest]: term populist gains of the ruling day government's environment, because that will keep the financial
[Guest]: sector policies anchored towards the long term stability.
[Guest]: Now, turning that around, why is an institution of weak regulation or central banking a problem?
[Guest]: It is a problem exactly for the reasons you mentioned, because when the presence of the
[Guest]: state is large in the financial sector, so there are public sector banks, there's tremendous
[Guest]: presence in insurance, pension, non-bank finance, etc, so you know, they are all around, then
[Guest]: there is a constant tendency to lean on the central bank to make it easier for these entities
[Guest]: to survive in spite of their performance.
[Guest]: There is also a constant pressure on the central bank to change the rules of the game, not
[Guest]: just central bank, I would say even other financial regulators, such as securities markets
[Guest]: regulator, insurance regulator, pension regulator, so that all of these public sector entities
[Guest]: in the financial sector, they are essentially all supporting the government's balance sheet
[Guest]: to be large, allowing their programs to be larger by channeling the savings that are
[Guest]: going from depositors, insurance premium payers, pensioners, etc, in one way or the other,
[Guest]: make it cheaper for the government to get its hands on to the savings compared to the
[Guest]: private sector.
[Guest]: Now, once the private sector is crowded out, they have a higher cost of borrowing, in general,
[Guest]: higher cost of capital, so they have to economize somewhere else, they can't compete that easily
[Guest]: because actually they have to generate high returns because their cost of capital is very
[Guest]: high.
[Guest]: So, they start looking for corners.
[Guest]: In my view, this could be one of the reasons why the overall evasion culture builds up
[Guest]: in the country because you've actually, by state being so large, you are subjecting them
[Guest]: to such high required returns on their investments that they say, I have to figure out how to
[Guest]: optimize my taxes in a very, very massive way in order to generate some return to those
[Guest]: who are providing me capital.
[Guest]: That's one.
[Guest]: And then, they know that the state is present everywhere, not just in financial sector,
[Guest]: but even in some non-financial sector.
[Guest]: Very often in countries where government is large, it is a reflection of this ideology
[Guest]: as we discussed, and they also start wanting to have to control decisions rather than making
[Guest]: it like a seamless processing of licensing and granting of permissions, etc.
[Guest]: And then, you end up having to work with the government, so to speak, even the tech sector
[Guest]: firms in the country, my friends who are entrepreneurs, they tell me that they can't arrange physical
[Guest]: space for their offices without actually doing some gafla on the side with the municipalities
[Guest]: or whatever to get the land or get access to the property and so on.
[Guest]: And then third, because you know that the state wants to be so large, you know that
[Guest]: there will be frequent interactions.
[Guest]: And if you can just work with them to get a few decisions your way, maybe this could
[Guest]: be a very symbiotic relationship for that enterprise and the government, not necessarily
[Guest]: always to the benefit of the economy.
[Guest]: And you get this sort of hyperactive consultations, lobbying, crony capitalism, etc., find a route.
[Guest]: And I'm fully with Professor Bhagwati here, which is that the biggest corruption of the
[Guest]: society, because of the strong presence of the state, comes because it ultimately shifts
[Guest]: the focus away from value creation, entrepreneurship, and enterprise to rent-seeking, tax evasion
[Guest]: and essentially, you know, getting concessions from the government, which are out of line.
[Guest]: I saw that culture when I was in India, I felt that many of our banks, financial firms
[Guest]: and industrialists, they are spending so much time interacting with the government offices,
[Guest]: rather than actually focusing on their core businesses, thinking hard about their strategies,
[Guest]: etc., that it seemed like a complete waste.
[Guest]: And this is the, going back to the Hayekian, Austrian thought of crowding out, I think
[Guest]: this is a very subtle form of crowding out of the economy's productivity.
[Guest]: And this is the fear that I have.
[Guest]: My fear is that as the state, we already have a large state, so to speak, in terms of its
[Guest]: presence in several sectors, in terms of its debt to GDP ratio, in terms of the fiscal
[Guest]: deficit amount that they have to borrow every year to meet their needs of their various
[Guest]: expenditures.
[Guest]: It's already very large.
[Guest]: If we don't reverse track, we really have to entertain the scenario of lost productivity,
[Guest]: crowding out of enterprise.
[Guest]: And you know, this will cost us in the long run.
[Guest]: So I think, as I was saying, without having referred to the Austrian economists very directly,
[Guest]: this is actually a deeper undercurrent of the book.
[Guest]: And in fact, in my India book on government-sponsored enterprises in the United States, so we were
[Guest]: explaining the role played by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in the mortgage debacle in the
[Guest]: United States.
[Guest]: I had an India version of the book, the book was called Guaranteed to Fail.
[Guest]: In the India version, I had a chapter on India as to, you know, what are the lessons for
[Guest]: India from the failures of mortgages and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in the United States.
[Guest]: And you know, there's a six-word proverb in Gujarati, you know, coming down from centuries,
[Guest]: I guess, which I think has taught me more economics than anything else.
[Guest]: And it goes as, jya raja vyapari, ya praja bhikari.
[Guest]: And you know, it's such a deep saying, whoever wrote this is, in my mind, one of the greatest
[Guest]: economists to have ever existed on the terra firma.
[Guest]: And it is so deep because there are so many shades to how this becomes true.
[Guest]: That when the government or the king is trying to be a trader and be in the business itself,
[Guest]: ultimately, you end up with people in poverty and being beggars.
[Guest]: And there are so many channels through which this arises and it does, I have found it so
[Guest]: thought provoking.
[Guest]: By the way, this was also taught to me by my teacher, Shailesh Shastri, who I mentioned,
[Guest]: he was the one who told me this.
[Guest]: Of course, as a student, I had no understanding as to how deep this message is.
[Guest]: You got some idea, you know, in Amar Chitra Ghata, there were these kings and, you know,
[Guest]: they were not ruling their citizens very well.
[Guest]: But it was only when I started doing economics that I realized, oh, there was such a wealth
[Guest]: of wisdom and knowledge in this.
[Guest]: And I think that we have to worry about this outcome.
[Guest]: And in the book, I tried to explain this in the previous chapter, if I could just finish
[Guest]: with that thought, which is that, you know, I refer to this concept of fiscal dominance,
[Guest]: which is that the government is becoming too overbearing in its control over financial
[Guest]: sector policies.
[Guest]: And it's important to understand why this is shifting over time.
[Guest]: Because I think, if you don't understand these shifts over time, you will not understand
[Guest]: what are the root causes of the problem, you will not get the diagnosis right.
[Guest]: I think the shift is happening because we were first a nationalized country.
[Guest]: So, you know, in 70s and 80s, it didn't matter if you controlled the financial sector via
[Guest]: the government, because there was no private sector to speak of for all practical purposes.
[Guest]: Then we liberalized, because we had no choice, we failed as a centralized nation, we were
[Guest]: at IMF, and you know, they required us to undergo structural packages.
[Guest]: So then we, you know, there was a coincidence of politics and economics, we got the right
[Guest]: changes through.
[Guest]: And for about 16-17 years, we were good with that also, the global growth was good and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: But in this global financial crisis, global growth slowed down.
[Guest]: And we had already reaped some of the low hanging fruits of the 90s reforms.
[Guest]: And now we needed actually a next set.
[Guest]: And I think this is where we stumbled.
[Guest]: For the next 10-12 years, instead of actually moving the economy towards a more liberalized
[Guest]: state, more undertaking greater divestments of the governments where it had not yet divested,
[Guest]: we have adopted, I would say, a hodgepodge of policies.
[Guest]: Some have tended to liberalize, but many have also regressed in terms of increasing the
[Guest]: state control.
[Guest]: There have been attempts to directly control the financial sector outcomes through bank
[Guest]: lending decisions, attempts to control the central bank policies, etc.
[Guest]: And I think it is because of these growth slowdown, the demand in the narrative for
[Guest]: the government to start playing a bigger role, governments approaching it myopically, rather
[Guest]: than factoring in the long run costs of excessive state control, that we are now seeing a gradual
[Guest]: shift over 10-12 years in this direction.
[Guest]: Part of the book is written because I want us to reconsider whether this shift that we
[Guest]: are experiencing, away from our liberalization divestment paradigm of 90s, back towards centralization
[Guest]: and more control of policies and regulations.
[Guest]: Is this really what we want to do?
[Guest]: We want to go back to the 70s and 80s-style India?
[Guest]: The fear is that we end up with the same levels of rate of growth, rather than actually realizing
[Guest]: the 8-9% that our kind of demographics and youth aspirations command and demand.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, despite the fact that you sometimes say that there is a bird of optimism within
[Amit Varma]: you, that's a pretty sort of worrying note.
[Amit Varma]: You know, while you were sort of speaking, I remembered an episode I'd done with a friend
[Amit Varma]: of mine on restaurant regulations, and he was a restauranteur, which perfectly illustrates
[Amit Varma]: what you said about the role of the state, where he pointed out that when he ran a restaurant
[Amit Varma]: and he used to run one in Bangalore, that he realized that there were two conflicting
[Amit Varma]: regulations.
[Amit Varma]: The excise department, because they wanted to monitor the alcohol that was going into
[Amit Varma]: the restaurant, insisted that there be only one entry into the restaurant.
[Amit Varma]: And the fire department, for safety reasons, insisted that there be multiple doors.
[Amit Varma]: So the poor guy, no matter what he does, he's breaking the law.
[Amit Varma]: And he's giving out at least one bribe every month, possibly two.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, other businessmen have told me that they give up to 30-40 bribes a month.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like you keep one person just for sort of dealing with bribes and doing
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you've got a great illustration of how this kind of thinking can seep into the culture
[Amit Varma]: in your book, where, you know, you've pointed out at one point that you've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: the tech industry and the pharma industry and said, look at the entrepreneurial spirit.
[Amit Varma]: And that's because they're relatively lightly regulated.
[Amit Varma]: But you said as far as a brick and mortar industries are concerned, you used to have
[Amit Varma]: a file called, Allah ke naam pe de de baba, because they would most often be writing,
[Amit Varma]: asking for, you know, restructuring bad loans or evergreening bad loans and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth.
[Amit Varma]: And would that be an example of how the culture can shift?
[Amit Varma]: Because then if there are industries which are structurally like that, then that will
[Amit Varma]: attract a certain kind of person and repel another kind of person and they're exactly
[Amit Varma]: the wrong outcomes.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: In fact, at my farewell speech at the Reserve Bank of India, this is exactly what I said.
[Guest]: I didn't describe our quest as necessarily one of just restoring financial stability.
[Guest]: I described the quest as one of trying to convert the India businesses from a rent extraction
[Guest]: society towards more of a value creation society, which is, you know, we need to shift the thinking
[Guest]: where the way you generate value is not by gold plating and getting your loan gold plated
[Guest]: and then over borrowing and then defaulting and then siphoning of the fund somewhere.
[Guest]: The way you create value is by actually genuinely designing new products, setting up thriving
[Guest]: enterprises for the long run, repaying the loans and the borrowings you have undertaken,
[Guest]: and yet be creating a lot of value for yourself and for the society as a whole.
[Guest]: Because when you create value, you are solving some genuine economic problem on the ground
[Guest]: for the citizens.
[Guest]: And I think we need a very significant shift in this culture.
[Guest]: It is a very complex problem because it is partly because of the overarching presence
[Guest]: of the state, both in certain sectors as well as in the financial sector, that has prevented
[Guest]: actually laying down a set of rules through which risk taking is supported.
[Guest]: But it is with the right due diligence, monitoring and collection skills, especially at our public
[Guest]: sector banks.
[Guest]: And to do that, why is that?
[Guest]: Because if you want the banks to lend well, then it has to be the case that when they
[Guest]: don't lend well, there have to be consequences, because that has got to be the most important
[Guest]: disciplining factor on these banks.
[Guest]: Now, what has happened with public sector banks is that neither is there any significant
[Guest]: penalty for not lending well, because there is the support of the state implicitly in
[Guest]: one form or the other.
[Guest]: And the bank regulation has been compromised again and again and again, so that the government,
[Guest]: which is the ultimate principal shareholder, also doesn't have to bear immediate consequences
[Guest]: of actually chipping in capital to these banks that have not done well.
[Guest]: Now, the sum total of all this is that public sector banks have become a quote unquote vehicle
[Guest]: through which the rent extraction by the brick and mortar industries has taken place in the
[Guest]: country.
[Guest]: Now, it need not just be at the brick and mortar industry level.
[Guest]: Suppose you keep encouraging public sector banks to lend to micro, small and medium sized
[Guest]: enterprises or to make the mudra loans, but these are not made well.
[Guest]: Then once again, the taxpayers as a whole are simply doing a transfer to one segment
[Guest]: of the society which is getting freebies without actually having the capacity to repay these
[Guest]: loans.
[Guest]: So, I think we are in need of a very fundamental reshift of the financial sector regulation,
[Guest]: so that those who bear the risks are made to pay for them.
[Guest]: And only if you make them pay for these risks, will they actually make the right decision
[Guest]: to allocate capital judiciously.
[Guest]: Once capital is being allocated judiciously, businesses will have no choice but to actually
[Guest]: go and come up with better value propositions.
[Guest]: And once they have better value propositions, we will get more enterprise, more thriving
[Guest]: environments, more employment in these traditional sectors, which do not seem to be exactly as
[Guest]: you said, doing as well as our tech and pharma sector.
[Guest]: And I think it is a great example because see, tech and pharma is not that reliant on
[Guest]: bank finance.
[Guest]: They are very heavily reliant either on market finance or actually on just equity investments.
[Guest]: And you know, a lot of it is actually in the form of foreign direct investments from abroad.
[Guest]: And just look at the number of unicorns we are creating in the tech space.
[Guest]: It's very, very impressive.
[Guest]: And you can see the shift when we came out of IIT Bombay in 95, we didn't have so much
[Guest]: entrepreneurship in us, because there was nothing happening that much on the ground.
[Guest]: It was still the beginning of the tech era in India.
[Guest]: You go to an IIT now and you look at the entrepreneurship in the youth, they all want to set up their
[Guest]: own businesses.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because they see that it can be done on ground.
[Guest]: And you know, somehow, fortunately, at least in the tech space, we have not overregulated
[Guest]: the space.
[Guest]: It's managing to do well.
[Guest]: There is one criticism that it hasn't created as much products of its own.
[Guest]: But I think now gradually through the sharing economy, maybe even that is changing a little
[Guest]: bit.
[Guest]: I think maybe the newer apps which are getting developed in India, they are more to serve
[Guest]: the local needs of the Indians rather than just to be the outsourcing office of the rest
[Guest]: of the world.
[Guest]: So I think that's a good contrast we observe between brick and mortar and the tech space.
[Guest]: And I hope that we can really fix the bank lending in a significant way.
[Guest]: And that's why Dr. Raghuram Rajan and I, we have actually just released a piece last week,
[Guest]: Indian banks, a time to reform where we are actually laying out a full blueprint of also
[Guest]: how to improve the lending decisions, the monitoring, the providing for the risks, especially
[Guest]: at the public sector banks, and how over a period of time to improve their governance
[Guest]: and change their ownership structure.
[Amit Varma]: That's quite insightful and wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And once we come back to it, I promise our listeners that we'll get to the meat of the
[Amit Varma]: matter, which is, you know, firstly, Dr. Acharya's experiences in the Reserve Bank of India and
[Amit Varma]: then the whole notion of fiscal dominance, which he calls a theory of everything in India,
[Amit Varma]: which I found very convincing and couldn't agree more with.
[Amit Varma]: So after a brief commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indiancolors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists in India
[Amit Varma]: and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indiancolors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indiancolors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Indiancolors.com, that's colors with an OU, and make art a part of
[Amit Varma]: your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen for 15% off at Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Veeral Acharya about his time at the RBI and about fiscal dominance,
[Amit Varma]: which is a concept he explains in great detail and quite beautifully, you know, very often
[Amit Varma]: in my show, one of the sort of recurring themes in my show is sort of the shifting relationship
[Amit Varma]: between the state and society.
[Amit Varma]: And I often kind of point out that, you know, if you look at the incentives of the state,
[Amit Varma]: it's not the welfare of society, it's the welfare of the state itself.
[Amit Varma]: And that's an interesting dynamic.
[Amit Varma]: But the state, of course, is not a monolithic beast.
[Amit Varma]: There are many moving parts within the state, which sort of have different functions and
[Amit Varma]: their own kind of relationships with each other.
[Amit Varma]: And central to the way our economy works, our financial system works, is the relationship
[Amit Varma]: between the government and the central bank.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what conceptually it should be, why it should be that, and what
[Amit Varma]: are the sort of forces which then create a conflict in that get in the way of that ideal
[Guest]: state of being?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So the way I see it is that, you know, the financial sector, as we discussed, is the
[Guest]: lifeblood of the economy, and you basically need a heart to regulate that flow.
[Guest]: And you know, the central bank is sort of that controlling agency, it through its various
[Guest]: controls, essentially controls indirectly the pumping of the lifeblood to the rest of
[Guest]: the economy.
[Guest]: Now, you know, to give a very simple analogy, again, you know, people say that when your
[Guest]: mind and heart start intermingling with each other, you get very serious problems in life.
[Guest]: And this is one way that I think about the government and the central bank in my analogy,
[Guest]: which is that in matters of heart, sometimes one has to keep the mind a little bit separate
[Guest]: and in matters of the mind, sometimes one has to keep the heart a little bit outside.
[Unknown]: And why is that desirable?
[Guest]: It's desirable because in the blueprint of the economy, so to speak, you know, the government
[Guest]: is actually, interestingly, constitutes what the elected officials are, they are the ones
[Guest]: who should take essentially any decisions that has direct tax implications, sort of
[Guest]: what one might call as fiscal implications.
[Guest]: In contrast, the central bank is more of a technocratic office, and it should ideally
[Guest]: not take decisions which are of direct fiscal in nature, it should take more these functions
[Guest]: which are regulatory in nature.
[Guest]: Now, clearly, however, if I'm putting the central bank on the same pedestal as the judiciary
[Guest]: or the Election Commission, and in my analogy, giving it the analogy of being as important
[Guest]: as the heart in the body, really, one has to think about, you know, how it's supposed
[Guest]: to function in the design of the economy as a whole.
[Guest]: So, and it's very important, it's very central, and therefore, it has a lot of power.
[Guest]: So Paul Tucker, one of the former central banker from Bank of England, he calls this
[Guest]: the unelected power, that the central bankers have tremendous power, but it is the unelected
[Guest]: power.
[Guest]: So, how should such technocratic power work in a society?
[Guest]: And to me, the right framework is that its objectives should be spelled out.
[Guest]: So, it should be made very clear what it is that you're supposed to try and attain.
[Guest]: Its tools should be very well spelled out.
[Guest]: And I'll give specific examples of each of these.
[Guest]: And then there should be democratic accountability around the attainment of objectives and the
[Guest]: exercise of the tools that were given to it.
[Guest]: So take a very specific example, a central bank is supposed to guard the interests of
[Guest]: the deposits in the banking system.
[Guest]: What are the tools given to it?
[Guest]: The tools given to it are the supervisory and the regulatory tools.
[Guest]: And then, you know, it can be held account by seeing whether the deposit insurance fund
[Guest]: is ever running out of funds or not.
[Guest]: Is it able to ensure that the system is able to pay for the safety of the deposits that
[Guest]: it is providing?
[Guest]: The most common one where the greatest amount of transparency is there in the central bank
[Guest]: objective is actually the price stability or the inflation targeting framework.
[Guest]: Here a central bank is given a very specific target, say, around the consumer price index
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: It's to maintain it at 4 percent with a band of plus minus 2 percent.
[Guest]: And while paying attention to growth being a caveat in the objective.
[Guest]: The tool given is the central bank policy rate, the rate at which it lends to banks
[Guest]: in the overnight markets.
[Guest]: And as democratic accountability, there is a committee that makes this decision.
[Guest]: The appointments are, of course, made by the government.
[Guest]: The committee, each member has to give transparent minutes as to why they voted to increase,
[Guest]: decrease or keep the rates where they were.
[Guest]: These minutes are published, they are scrutinized, analyzed.
[Guest]: And if the central bank fails to maintain inflation within the band of 2 percent to
[Guest]: 6 percent for three quarters in a row, it has to give a testimony to the parliament
[Guest]: as to why, what factors led to not attaining this objective.
[Guest]: So, to me, this is the right way to organize the system, which is you give the central
[Guest]: bank a very clear mandate.
[Guest]: You tell what are the tools.
[Guest]: You can allow for discretion, but specify that discretion.
[Guest]: And I think when discretion is exercised, the central bank should be required to explain
[Guest]: why it is that I had to exercise the discretion.
[Guest]: What are the exceptional circumstances?
[Guest]: Is my discretion temporary or do I expect it to be there for a while?
[Guest]: Because I've exercised this discretion, what are the expected outcomes and what may be
[Guest]: the unintended consequences?
[Guest]: Now, this, I would say, is a reasonable democratic accountability process where you give power
[Guest]: to unelected representatives or the technocrats, but within a certain framework.
[Guest]: Now, of course, sometimes these frameworks change, you know, we are constantly learning.
[Guest]: The needs of the economy are changing, the financial sectors, technology actually keeps
[Guest]: changing the way they are doing intermediation and credit lending keeps changing, newer forms
[Guest]: of financial firms keep arising, earlier it just used to be traditional banks, then you
[Guest]: had banks, which also started playing in markets.
[Guest]: And now we have very large non-bank finance companies also.
[Guest]: But the whole idea to me, and I think this is a bit of a novel nuance into the literature
[Guest]: on central banking itself, to me, an important function of keeping an arm's length between
[Guest]: the government and the central bank is so that the short term pressures that are there
[Guest]: on the government during electoral cycles, the world over, not just in India, but the
[Guest]: world over there are short term electoral pressures, that those pressures don't compromise
[Guest]: the functioning of the heart of the economy.
[Guest]: You want to keep an arm's length, because you want the central bank to be continuously
[Guest]: focused on its long term objectives.
[Guest]: You have appointed the technocrats to run this job, you have given them the tools, they
[Guest]: can factor in the relative importance of the short term versus the long term.
[Guest]: And if they fail in their mandate, they will be held democratically accountable, if they
[Guest]: have to explain to the parliament why they failed, if they're always explaining through
[Guest]: reports why these changes were made.
[Guest]: Now, this kind of an arrangement is important because it will prevent what is called as
[Guest]: fiscal dominance.
[Guest]: And what is fiscal dominance?
[Guest]: Fiscal dominance is when for short term pressures, the governments want to pump prime the economy's
[Guest]: growth or because they have borrowed so much, they want the central bank to be focused on
[Guest]: helping the government roll over its debts at the expense of its long run objectives.
[Guest]: So fiscal dominance, the reason why it's called dominance is because you're trying to distract
[Guest]: the central bank from what is its otherwise understood functions, and instead focus too
[Guest]: closely on the government's immediate needs and objectives.
[Guest]: And the idea is that you have to tie your hands in advance, because when governments
[Guest]: do too much that is in the short term interest of the economy, they leave a massive legacy
[Guest]: of problems down the line.
[Guest]: Take the example of subprime lending in the United States.
[Guest]: It was basically to make up for lack of adequate jobs and stimulus on the ground.
[Guest]: And you know, the system had to witness a massive financial crisis, you know, over time,
[Guest]: government foray into subprime lending combined with private sectors foray into subprime lending,
[Guest]: and you know, it became a perfect storm at some point.
[Guest]: Look at the fiscal stimulus in India of 2009 to 12, you know, we have still not cleaned
[Guest]: up the mess.
[Guest]: Many of our defaulted borrowers from that time are still not fully resolved.
[Guest]: Bank losses are still not 100% fully recognized.
[Guest]: And you know, time doesn't wait for you, new shocks come and start hitting the economy.
[Guest]: So the idea of keeping the central bank separate from the government is that you allow the
[Guest]: central bank with all this democratic accountability framework to be run by technocrats who can
[Guest]: remain at arm's length and constantly focus on the long term.
[Guest]: And so it's basically the government trying to do as the elected representatives of the
[Guest]: citizens what they think is the right, but you recognize ahead of time that they will
[Guest]: be subject to short term pressures, especially around the electoral cycles.
[Guest]: And you don't want the entire engine to fail down the line, because you pay too much attention
[Guest]: to this short term pressures.
[Guest]: And so you have to strike this balance in the independence or the operational autonomy
[Guest]: of the central bank.
[Guest]: And an important point to make here is that the Reserve Bank of India is an all purpose
[Guest]: central bank.
[Guest]: And this is one important point I want to convey.
[Guest]: It's safeguarding deposits because it runs the deposit insurance fund.
[Guest]: It is the debt manager for the government, so it places government's debt.
[Guest]: It controls the regulations of the debt markets and the currency markets.
[Guest]: It's supposed to manage the external sector, so safeguard against sharp volatility or depreciations
[Guest]: in the value of the rupee.
[Guest]: It is in charge of the interest rate setting process, so it affects the cost of borrowing
[Guest]: in the economy.
[Guest]: And it also controls the liquidity framework in the sense of how much reserves are being
[Guest]: made available in the country to banks in order to help them manage transfers of liquidity
[Guest]: in the system.
[Guest]: Now, with all these functions concentrated, and contrast this with, say, United States,
[Guest]: where say the deposit insurance is with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, supervision
[Guest]: is partly with the Federal Reserve, but it's partly with OCC, the Office of Comptroller
[Guest]: of Currency and so on.
[Guest]: With so many functions in one institution, and with the simultaneous presence of public
[Guest]: sector banks, government controlled insurance companies, pension funds, power finance companies,
[Guest]: etc., the scope of fiscal dominance in India is very large.
[Guest]: It can permeate almost all policies of the financial sector very quickly if the central
[Guest]: bank is essentially compromised.
[Guest]: And a part of the explanation in the preface chapter, and I'm, of course, partly exaggerating
[Guest]: when I call it a theory of everything in India, but my sense is it's only a slight exaggeration
[Guest]: as far as the financial sector is concerned, because I give the six examples one after
[Guest]: the other of the pressure points, of how many pressure points kept coming up as eyewitness
[Guest]: during my term of the center trying to influence the policies of the central bank without it
[Guest]: being clearly laid out through public discussion, public reports, research, facts, data, as
[Guest]: to whether this is in the long run interest of the economy.
[Guest]: And you know, it can get done through backdoor compromises.
[Guest]: It can get done through what I call as phone central banking.
[Guest]: It can be done through choice of the specific board members who are being appointed on the
[Guest]: board of the central bank.
[Guest]: And essentially, if the central bank is not functioning with a rule based decision making
[Guest]: system, where any exceptions are very transparently explained through reports as to why we are
[Guest]: engaging in this exception, what is the sunset clause, when will it end?
[Guest]: What are the intended consequences, unintended consequences?
[Guest]: It becomes too easy to start these compromises.
[Guest]: You know, no one wants to have a confrontation every other day with the government.
[Guest]: And so you start hoping that, oh, if you make this one or two compromises, maybe things
[Guest]: will subside.
[Guest]: You know, you can call it politicking, whatever you want to call it, but at the end of the
[Guest]: day, it is an erosion of the operational autonomy and independence of the central bank.
[Guest]: And what is misunderstood, in my view, by the central bankers when fiscal dominance
[Guest]: is very strong, because the government balance sheet is very large, it's experiencing debt
[Guest]: problems on a regular basis in terms of costs of borrowing in the markets, its banks, public
[Guest]: sector banks are not in great shape, etc.
[Guest]: Is that when the dominance becomes so strong, whatever you compromise today is the beginning
[Guest]: of a new compromise tomorrow.
[Guest]: It's not a ceasefire, because the underlying problem, as long as the underlying problem
[Guest]: doesn't go away, they're going to wake up with that problem every other day, and then
[Guest]: try to put pressure on the central bank to accommodate.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because if the central bank accommodates, these long run objectives can be kicked down
[Guest]: the road, and you get like the short term adjustments that the government needs.
[Guest]: Now, two points are important here.
[Guest]: Sometimes it is seen that this is primarily a criticism about the government.
[Guest]: And that's not what it's meant to be.
[Guest]: Fiscal dominance comes about because the institutional underpinning of the central banking is weak.
[Guest]: The way it goes about its decision making rules is somewhat weak.
[Guest]: Now, both parties are in a way responsible for it.
[Guest]: Of course, the letter of the law is with the government as to what institutional independence
[Guest]: is given to the central bank by the acts.
[Guest]: And as Dr. Reddy explains in his masterful forward in my book, RBI has one of the weakest
[Guest]: acts governing it in terms of the operational autonomy.
[Guest]: But the second point is that there is a difference between the de jure and the de facto, what
[Guest]: is in the letter of the law and what is in effect.
[Guest]: What comes about in effect is also partly a function of how central bank goes about
[Guest]: its own decision making.
[Guest]: And in my view, if the central bank uses rule based decision making, pushes for rule based
[Guest]: decision making.
[Guest]: Inflation targeting framework didn't come about by itself.
[Guest]: The central bank governors, Governor Rajan and Governor Patel had to push for it, for
[Guest]: this to happen.
[Guest]: Of course, Governor Patel was a deputy governor at that point of time when the framework was
[Guest]: adopted.
[Guest]: So, they have to push for this, they have to be willing to speak truth to the power,
[Guest]: because you have to shift the debate towards the long run of the economy when electoral
[Guest]: pressures are pushing them otherwise.
[Guest]: They have to be willing to say no to certain outcomes.
[Guest]: They have to be willing to communicate and have a public engagement about these issues
[Guest]: along the line, because you have to shift the public opinion and not just the opinion
[Guest]: of the political system or of the system, the financial system around the central bank.
[Guest]: And finally, it requires unfortunately playing the game of chicken sometimes.
[Guest]: You have to not give in to the first compromise pressure that gets put on you.
[Guest]: So, I give the example of Paul Walker, the late governor of the Federal Reserve, where
[Guest]: you know, once the Reagan administration came to power, they had a very expansionary manifesto,
[Guest]: they wanted to cut taxes and, you know, turbocharge the economy that way.
[Guest]: And Paul Walker had just arrested double digit inflation.
[Guest]: He said, I can't do this.
[Guest]: I won't be able to keep the rates low simply to fund your fiscal stimulus because the long
[Guest]: end of the yield curve is already rising and telling you that this is going to be inflationary
[Guest]: and I have just arrested inflation.
[Guest]: He had private meetings, backdoor compromises were sought, now he has openly disclosed that
[Guest]: and he didn't give in at all.
[Guest]: And you know, he won the day because President Reagan in the end didn't adopt as expansionary
[Guest]: a manifesto.
[Guest]: The yield curve actually didn't get worse in terms of the long term costs of borrowing
[Guest]: for the US government and inflation was actually kept at bay.
[Guest]: So, it requires a certain amount of obduracy and doggedness.
[Guest]: Now, of course, at times the fiscal dominance pressures can be so high that the central
[Guest]: bankers may be left with no choice and, you know, then you have to see what to do about
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: So, I have a broader sort of two part question here and they both arise from what you have
[Amit Varma]: just described this complex relationship and one part is philosophical and the other part
[Amit Varma]: is practical.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, we often speak about the rules of the game, but it strikes me that what we
[Amit Varma]: have here is really two games, not one.
[Amit Varma]: One, of course, you've in the past made, you know, you've used test cricket as a metaphor
[Amit Varma]: that the central bank should be like a test cricketer, you're looking at the long term
[Amit Varma]: and the way it strikes me is that the game of governance, not just central banking, the
[Amit Varma]: game of good governance or keeping a nation going is a long term game where policies take
[Amit Varma]: a long, long time to play out, you have to think of the long term, but the game of politics
[Amit Varma]: is like T20 cricket, it's a short term game where politicians constantly have the imperative
[Amit Varma]: of the next election upon them and, you know, even when a general election is just over,
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't mean the next election is five years away, because there are state elections
[Amit Varma]: all the time.
[Amit Varma]: So you're constantly sort of in campaigning mode.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a conflict between these two.
[Amit Varma]: And some could even say it's a conflict between a democracy and a republic that when we talk
[Amit Varma]: about a country being a democratic republic, is it really one thing, you know, and that's
[Amit Varma]: a fundamental conflict.
[Amit Varma]: Now, at a philosophical level, here is where the issue is, I don't see how you square the
[Amit Varma]: circle, because the argument that politicians will often make is an argument of legitimacy,
[Amit Varma]: where they will say that, listen, we are a democracy, we've got an elect, we've got the
[Amit Varma]: popular mandate, we are legitimate, why should we listen to unelected, unaccountable elites,
[Amit Varma]: they should do what we tell them.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that becomes, you know, one argument, whereas, you know, whatever you may say, or
[Amit Varma]: I may say, or even you may say, as somebody in the Reserve Bank, it could just be what
[Amit Varma]: is your legitimacy, you're not elected.
[Amit Varma]: So I think, at a philosophical level, that is a circle that needs to be squared.
[Amit Varma]: And at a practical level, it then strikes me that isn't the erosion of institutions
[Amit Varma]: over the long run, always inevitable, because of, you know, what we've seen the pattern
[Amit Varma]: of populism, not just in modern times with, you know, people like Erdogan and Modi and
[Amit Varma]: Orban and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But the pattern of populist throughout history is to rail against unelected elites and destroy
[Amit Varma]: institutions.
[Amit Varma]: And given that, even if for a long time, you might have an equilibrium, where there is
[Amit Varma]: a certain respectful relationship between a central bank and a government, you know,
[Amit Varma]: isn't erosion inevitable on the incentives of politics, towards sort of ensuring that
[Amit Varma]: kind of erosion, because then you know, the less powerful the institutions get, the more
[Amit Varma]: powerful the government of the day is.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, an example of that could simply be that, look, they control the appointments.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it's in me, it almost seems remarkable that, you know, people like Dr. Rajan and
[Amit Varma]: Dr. Patel, and you happen to work in the central bank and took the stands you did.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't see why that should not be an outlier.
[Amit Varma]: It's so easy for a government just to put its, I mean, I'm not making a comment on the
[Amit Varma]: current incumbent, but it's so easy for a government to just put its own people in any
[Amit Varma]: institution, not necessarily just the RBI alone.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, degrade it.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something like at a philosophical level, of course, I'm looking forward to your
[Amit Varma]: answer.
[Amit Varma]: But even at a practical level, you've been in the thick of things, you've actually grappled
[Amit Varma]: with it.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your experience, you know, in that process.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a it's a complex question with many shades.
[Guest]: So let me try and see if I can do justice to it by breaking it up into certain parts,
[Guest]: I would say.
[Guest]: So firstly, I agree that, see, at the end of the day, they control the appointment,
[Guest]: the government controls the appointments.
[Guest]: And to me, that's why I think once they have made the appointments, and then the framework
[Guest]: is in place, they have to let go at that point, because, you know, the system is already giving
[Guest]: you the rights to appoint the people.
[Guest]: And so, you know, you can factor in whatever considerations you have.
[Guest]: And that's what I feel that when your own elected officials are resisting the pressures
[Guest]: being imposed on them, it's more likely that it's actually because you are trying to do
[Guest]: something that's more in the short term interests for your electoral cycle outcomes rather than
[Guest]: in the long run interest of the economy.
[Guest]: Second, see, once a reasonable person has been put into these positions, such as, say,
[Guest]: being the governor of a central bank, they will feel a mental responsibility to stick
[Guest]: to the letter of the law, what is constitutionally and through the RBI acts, etc, being required
[Guest]: for them to perform as their functions.
[Guest]: The system has been run very, very well by people of very, very high integrity.
[Guest]: And I think it's in the DNA and the culture of the central bank, thankfully, that, you
[Guest]: know, a lot of attention is paid to what the institution is required to do as its mandate.
[Guest]: And that could very easily mean that even the people appointed by the same government
[Guest]: will actually disagree with the government.
[Guest]: And I think there should be healthy space for these kinds of disagreements, because
[Guest]: the idea that only the elected officials can take the right decisions for the country without
[Guest]: necessarily a feedback from the rest of the system is, I think, it can't be right.
[Guest]: You know, as I said, in a country of billion people, the bright ideas for individual problems
[Guest]: are likely to be distributed rather than just in the minds of a few individuals.
[Guest]: And so you need that feedback to the system of, you know, and it happens through a bit
[Guest]: of back and forth.
[Guest]: Sometimes it means some resistance, some speaking of truth to the power, some no's, and playing
[Guest]: a little bit of game of chicken, as I was calling it, etc.
[Guest]: And the third point is that coming to very specific to the RBI itself, see, why is the
[Guest]: RBI Act in part weak, it's weak, because there is this exception called the Section 7 of
[Guest]: the RBI Act, which got a lot of attention during our term.
[Guest]: It had never been invoked in the history of the Reserve Bank of India.
[Guest]: It was, what does that Section 7 clause do?
[Guest]: It allows the government to basically give effectively a direction to the governor of
[Guest]: the RBI, it says in consultation with the governor, but of course, you know, that just
[Guest]: means that there has been some back and forth, and yet they weren't able to resolve the problem.
[Guest]: And it says it's in public when it's in public interest.
[Guest]: Now, clearly, therefore, the RBI Act is very clear, it says if the government wants the
[Guest]: governor to do something, as an executive, they have the powers to do it.
[Guest]: But my point is that it says very clearly that it's in public interest.
[Guest]: So if such a direction is to be given, it should be made first transparent to the public
[Guest]: as to what exactly are these points of disagreement, what are the government's points, what is
[Guest]: the Reserve Bank of India's points, what are the pros and cons of taking a decision as
[Guest]: the government wants or not taking the decision as the RBI is pushing for etc.
[Guest]: And at a simple level, that is why that is the point of the Adi Shroff memorial speech,
[Guest]: we were still in office when this happened.
[Guest]: But we had to give the speech because if we had to take certain decisions, we had to actually
[Guest]: we thought that given section seven clause was to be invoked in public interest, it has
[Guest]: to be made transparent to the public at large as to what are some of the key points of contention,
[Guest]: what are the areas of disagreement, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And I think, as I say, in the chapter, there are pressure points were all through, there
[Guest]: were tremendous interest in getting us to open up the credit and liquidity taps in 2018,
[Guest]: just the way it was at the time of fiscal stimulus after the global financial crisis.
[Guest]: We all know what was the year 2018, you know, there were clear short term electoral pressures
[Guest]: building up at that point of time.
[Guest]: And you know, in a way, we had to resist those pressures, because we had just started the
[Guest]: process of cleaning up the financial sector a few years back, the job wasn't complete.
[Guest]: We knew how difficult it is to clean up an excess credit cycle after it has happened
[Guest]: the way we saw it in 2009 to 12.
[Guest]: So it all being in front of your eyes, I don't see how the central bank would have just tagged
[Guest]: along just because the government wanted it to be.
[Guest]: And in fact, as I describe in the book, in the first 10 to 12 months of my term, we were
[Guest]: completely in sync with the government on cleaning up this process.
[Guest]: And then there was a bit of a reversal.
[Guest]: And I think all of this circumstantial evidence, if I could call it seems to suggest that the
[Guest]: driving forces were actually the short term political pressure, there was also a tremendous
[Guest]: demand to get a huge balance sheet dividend to be paid to the government out of the central
[Guest]: bank.
[Guest]: You know, the numbers that started out were extraordinarily large, and then they came
[Guest]: down eventually.
[Guest]: So I think I agree with you that it is, there is a natural tug of war here all over the
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: Governments are always wanting sometimes the central banks to do what is in their short
[Guest]: term interests, keep borrowing costs low, keep a lot of liquidity high, keep bank credit
[Guest]: conditions easy, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But given I think our initial conditions are such where the government deficits are large,
[Guest]: there's a big government presence in public sector banking.
[Guest]: And the RBI Act is weak to start with in granting the central bank operational autonomy.
[Guest]: It is my experience that the fiscal dominance pressures in India now are way higher than
[Guest]: in other parts of the world.
[Guest]: And you know, there is always a tendency in India to justify our own mediocrity and bad
[Guest]: decision making by appealing to the rest of the world.
[Guest]: I wrote about fiscal dominance, I wrote the entire book, my manuscript was given before
[Guest]: the COVID outbreak had become significant, it was all finished in February, early March.
[Guest]: And immediately people in India said, oh, but you know, the world over now the governments
[Guest]: and the central banks are working together to come out of COVID.
[Guest]: My question is no, they are doing it to come out of COVID.
[Guest]: We started this process even before two or three years before of fiscally dominating
[Guest]: the central bank.
[Guest]: And you can see the damage that it has done in my view, the long run test match view is
[Guest]: really playing out.
[Guest]: See, what is the cost of dominating the central bank to roll over your debts, you know, not
[Guest]: recapitalize the public sector banks, etc.
[Guest]: Is that the market discipline on the government is lost on its balance sheet.
[Guest]: You know, the government has effectively run a consolidated deficit of 8 to 10% of GDP
[Guest]: pre COVID, depending on how you do the consolidation.
[Guest]: You know, post COVID, it will go up to 14 to 15%.
[Guest]: The fact that we didn't bring our fiscal deficit in check before COVID has meant that it has
[Guest]: been hard to undertake fiscal expenditures right now in the midst of COVID.
[Guest]: That's a serious cost to the economy in my view that you chose to spend so much in good
[Guest]: times rather than saving a capacity to spend if you had a difficult situation such as the
[Guest]: pandemic.
[Guest]: And of course, no one knows, but that's what robustness, resilience and stress test planning
[Guest]: is you don't exhaust all your buffers in what are looking relatively calm years.
[Guest]: Second, the public sector banks problem has not been fixed, neither in terms of capitalization
[Guest]: nor in terms of governance and quality of lending, underwriting, monitoring, etc., nor
[Guest]: in terms of the government shedding stakes.
[Guest]: Now, the losses during COVID are likely to rise perhaps to, you know, 12.5 to 14.7% as
[Guest]: per RBI's financial stability report.
[Guest]: Now, we are going to be dealing with a further loan loss problem even before we have fixed
[Guest]: the old one.
[Guest]: So, this kicking the can down the road and justifying always doing what is in short-term
[Guest]: interest at the expense of positioning the economy structurally right for the long run.
[Guest]: And we do this year after year after year with more intensity in some years such as
[Guest]: 2018 than others.
[Guest]: And this tendency of not positioning yourself structurally right for the long run leads
[Guest]: to this tendency to put dominance pressure on the central bank every year to get some
[Guest]: concessions.
[Guest]: And, you know, in the end, we are gradually, in my opinion, losing our potential to grow
[Guest]: our productivity, our ability to create jobs.
[Guest]: All these are steadily deteriorating.
[Guest]: And of course, there is bigger collateral damage, as you pointed out, which is the fact
[Guest]: that you are emaciating the decision-making processes, which in effect granted the central
[Guest]: bank a fair amount of operational autonomy even when the letter of the law was not that
[Guest]: great.
[Guest]: And I think I want to stress one point here, which is quite important, I mean, again, to
[Guest]: quote Dr. Reddy from his masterful forward in my book, he says, listen, in 70s and 80s,
[Guest]: the government, the central bank and the public sector banks were a Hindu undivided family
[Guest]: where no one kept anyone's accounts.
[Guest]: And it didn't matter that time, there was no private sector to talk of.
[Guest]: And we were generating three, three and a half percent, we had never embraced the ability
[Guest]: and the opportunity to actually grow faster than that.
[Guest]: Even that failed.
[Guest]: We could not even generate three, three and a half percent without running up imbalances
[Guest]: on the external sector.
[Guest]: Now, the economy is different.
[Guest]: The economy has a presence of the private sector.
[Guest]: The growth aspirations are of eight to nine percent per annum.
[Guest]: They are in fact necessary given our young demographics.
[Guest]: And if we want to continue on the path of eradicating poverty the way we have for two
[Guest]: decades, since 1991, then it's not good enough to function like a Hindu undivided family
[Guest]: anymore where no one keeps anyone's proper accounts.
[Guest]: Because if the government becomes very large, now the cost is not just that down the line,
[Guest]: you will have a crisis.
[Guest]: The cost is even now because you are crowding out the private sector, you are crowding out
[Guest]: its enterprise, you are converting businesses from value creating enterprises into rent
[Guest]: seeking enterprises.
[Guest]: And so I think the danger of going down this path of regression towards nationalized economy,
[Guest]: a centralized control of decision making and policymaking, the danger is clear and present
[Guest]: right now.
[Guest]: And therefore, I think we need deep institutional reforms on the fiscal side, on the financial
[Guest]: sector side, and also on the real side, to actually turbocharge the economy so that we
[Guest]: get all the growth we can possibly generate in the post COVID and amidst COVID recovery.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the key nuances which you pointed out in, you know, the preface
[Amit Varma]: of your book, which is just an absolutely wonderful chapter, one of the key nuances
[Amit Varma]: that I'd like to draw my listeners attention to is the fiscal philosophy of our state by
[Amit Varma]: which you don't mean this government or that government, but how the state has looked at
[Amit Varma]: spending all throughout, where you point out that a significant chunk of our spending is
[Amit Varma]: revenue expenditures, like subsidies, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And a very small chunk is capital expenditure, which is things like infrastructure and so
[Amit Varma]: on, which will, you know, have positive externalities lead to growth in the long run.
[Amit Varma]: So what's happening is that instead of building the pie, instead of doing things which will,
[Amit Varma]: you know, help the economy grow, we are redistributing bits of the pie.
[Amit Varma]: And that redistribution, that economic support, and all of that also play into those short
[Amit Varma]: term populist imperatives.
[Amit Varma]: So here again, incentives take you towards a particular kind of spending.
[Amit Varma]: And you've pointed out that how, you know, when you combine the problem of the fiscal
[Amit Varma]: deficit with how the current account deficit has been changing, you say, and I'll quote
[Amit Varma]: this bit, these twin deficits, fiscal deficit and current account deficit make India vulnerable
[Amit Varma]: to a sudden stop, in which a deterioration in the quality of government or corporate
[Amit Varma]: balance sheets, rising inflation, either due to domestic stimulus or oil price shock, Federal
[Amit Varma]: Reserve rate hikes, and dollar absorption or a surge in global risk aversion can trigger
[Amit Varma]: a withdrawal by foreign investors who are financing external funding of the government
[Amit Varma]: in the corporate sector.
[Amit Varma]: The resulting fallout in the form of a sharply depreciating Indian rupee, a rise in oil import
[Amit Varma]: bill and inflation, further widening of the twin deficits, and the debt spiral or loss
[Amit Varma]: of investor confidence that ensues present a substantial risk to India's financial stability.
[Amit Varma]: Such risk has materialized unexpectedly at least once a decade over the past 30 years
[Amit Varma]: with several minor hiccups in between.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out that the way to address this would be to make tough structural adjustments.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, what we do is, to quote you again, we instead do, quote, what is more expedient,
[Amit Varma]: which is to economically and financially repress the economy to fund its borrowings, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this phrase was very interesting to me, you know, repress the economy.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through some of the ways in which this happens and what the implications are.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this, of course, is sort of an elaboration of fiscal dominance, which is
[Amit Varma]: what, you know, that the chapter in the book is about.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit of the different shades of meaning of, you know, repressing the economy
[Amit Varma]: in this case.
[Guest]: Absolutely, Amit.
[Guest]: So, you know, historically, the most common repression used to be that essentially the
[Guest]: government and the RBI sat down together and said that we will impose a very high statutory
[Guest]: liquidity ratio, as it was called SLR on banks.
[Guest]: At its peak, it was around 40%.
[Guest]: And what does that mean?
[Guest]: It means that when you or I deposited one rupee into a bank, 40 paisa would necessarily
[Guest]: have to be earmarked for holdings of government bonds.
[Guest]: Now, what is this doing?
[Guest]: What this kind of repression does is that it forces an increase in the borrowing costs
[Guest]: for everyone else, because you can't compete with the government on a level playing field
[Guest]: for about 40% of the deposit base of the banking system.
[Guest]: Now, why is the government doing this?
[Guest]: The government is doing this because it wants to keep running its populist programs, as
[Guest]: we, as you mentioned, you know, more than 90% of centers expenditure is in subsidies
[Guest]: rather than infrastructure or health.
[Guest]: And similarly, at state level, maybe 70 to 75% is almost subsidies and other kinds of
[Guest]: revenue expenditures, you know, salaries, pensions, whatever, because, you know, they're
[Guest]: owning so many things all over the country and employing relatively unproductive labor
[Guest]: in my view, in many cases.
[Guest]: So the cost of actually supporting that employment, providing all these subsidies is the fact
[Guest]: that when a private sector firm wants to borrow, a micro, small, medium sized enterprise wants
[Guest]: to borrow or you and I want to borrow, say, in order to invest in a house or, you know,
[Guest]: buy a car or fund an education loan for our child, we are actually paying a higher cost
[Guest]: because the government has to keep running its program.
[Guest]: So this is a form of a borrowing related repression tax.
[Guest]: Now second, when now we have brought down, you know, various governors brought down this
[Guest]: statutory liquidity ratio down from 40% to below 20%.
[Guest]: So you know, that repression has come down.
[Guest]: But now what that means is that because of lack of repression, the government has to
[Guest]: borrow in the market.
[Guest]: Now what was the idea?
[Guest]: Why should they borrow in the market?
[Guest]: Because rather than forcing banks, let them borrow in the market, because then the market
[Guest]: will reflect in the price of the government debt.
[Guest]: What do they see as the long run prospects of the economy from the debt that you are
[Guest]: undertaking?
[Guest]: Will the inflation rise?
[Guest]: Are you going to generate enough growth to generate taxes to repay these debts or not?
[Guest]: Now, when the government costs of borrowing rises again, what do they do?
[Guest]: They turn to the central bank and say, oh, now you must buy my debt, because otherwise
[Guest]: the borrowing costs are rising.
[Guest]: Even the pressures on the central bank to quote unquote, monetize the government debt,
[Guest]: they have been there even pre-COVID.
[Guest]: These are in fact, I described that, you know, what is opening of the liquidity tabs mean
[Guest]: part of it was actually to just go and buy a lot of government debt to open market operations,
[Guest]: so that you would flood the banking system with more liquidity.
[Guest]: But of course, a part of that is to simply keep the government's borrowing costs low.
[Guest]: Now, what you do when you monetize the government deficit is that one, you prevent the financial
[Guest]: sector from taking on the government bond risk and earning a higher yield on it.
[Guest]: Instead, you give them a very low overnight rate through the central bank.
[Guest]: And more importantly, you also reduce the fiscal discipline on the government.
[Guest]: So the government balance sheet keeps getting larger and larger, aggravating the first crowding
[Guest]: out problem that I was discussing.
[Guest]: And now if the financial sector is not making much profit on its holding of government deficits
[Guest]: in one way or the other, because the central bank is monetizing it, then you know, you
[Guest]: sort of reduce their profitability to an extent in the process as well.
[Guest]: And third, and maybe a worse form of repression is the fact that because RBI is an all purpose
[Guest]: central bank, the government also wants to reduce its recapitalization amounts into public
[Guest]: sector banks and other government owned entities.
[Guest]: To do that, it asks RBI to relax the rules for recognition of loan losses, not require
[Guest]: that you provide for anticipated losses ahead of time.
[Guest]: And because you don't do that, the banking system is always like a tight rubber band
[Guest]: that is stretched so hard that even a little bit of disturbance might actually run the
[Guest]: risk of snapping it.
[Guest]: The bankers feel the pressure themselves, because they have never recognized what their
[Guest]: loan losses are in a true economic sense.
[Guest]: So they're always dealing with legacy problems.
[Guest]: And you get two kinds of problems in bank behavior out of this one, banks are now very
[Guest]: fearful of any further losses.
[Guest]: So they want to keep evergreening and keep lending to the same borrowers who have already
[Guest]: defaulted.
[Guest]: So this is called a zombie lending, you extend and pretend as though everything is fine on
[Guest]: the loans.
[Guest]: Or they do lazy lending, which is that they lend entirely to the government because that
[Guest]: RBI regulation doesn't require any extra capital to be brought by the shareholders.
[Guest]: So that's called lazy lending.
[Guest]: Now, therefore, what you observe with public sector banks is that many times they are so
[Guest]: much in excess of the statutory liquidity ratio, they would have, if the statutory liquidity
[Guest]: ratio is 18%, they will have 25 to 27% of government bond holding.
[Guest]: Effectively, that's again a repression because they have no capital.
[Guest]: So they are going to lend to an MSME or a private sector borrower or a household only
[Guest]: if they get a lot more extra return to compensate them for not having to provide capital on
[Guest]: these other kinds of holdings that they have.
[Guest]: So in one way or the other, the repression is a repression of the saver.
[Guest]: Because in the end, you know, the quality of deposit services, etc. being provided by
[Guest]: public sector banks is not great.
[Guest]: If RBI is being forced to keep interest rates low, then deposit rates will eventually follow
[Guest]: and the saver again gets low returns on deposits.
[Guest]: It's a repression of the borrowers in the private sector because they are going to have
[Guest]: to pay higher costs to borrow.
[Guest]: So they have higher hurdle rates.
[Guest]: Many investments don't look profitable, or as we have been discussing, they switch from
[Guest]: a value creation to a rent extraction mode in order to generate these higher returns
[Guest]: given their higher cost of capital.
[Guest]: And third, and importantly, there is also a repression of the overall allocation of
[Guest]: capital in the economy.
[Guest]: Instead of taxpayer money going to the government and the government being under fiscal discipline
[Guest]: to allocate this capital well to generate growth, to do the right kinds of investments
[Guest]: such as infrastructure, health and education, which will expand the growth path of the economy
[Guest]: and build a credibility with the market that yes, the government can repay even a higher
[Guest]: cost of borrowing.
[Guest]: Instead, the taxpayer money gets allocated into short term revenue programs of the government
[Guest]: that have a lot of populist appeal.
[Guest]: They are an easy narrative to provide to the common man without ever spelling out what
[Guest]: are the true economic costs of actually running these programs in the long run.
[Guest]: And so I think it's such a massive repression of the economy all around.
[Guest]: So to me, it is not a surprise at all that investments in many parts of Indian real economy
[Guest]: are very tepid, because when you have a government that is trying to do so much in the short
[Guest]: term pump priming of the economy, short term subsidy based narrative friendly programs,
[Guest]: and so much to repress the financial sector policies to facilitate its own borrowing,
[Guest]: where is the space for the rest of the economy to grow?
[Guest]: It's simply not possible.
[Guest]: The only entities that are able to grow well in India are those who are able to go outside
[Guest]: the country and borrow in the external markets, or get foreign direct investments.
[Guest]: And those parts of the economy thrive.
[Guest]: And of course, what are these in the FDI case, it is mainly the tech and pharma space.
[Guest]: And in case of external borrowings, it has to be relatively large and well rated companies.
[Guest]: But that leaves out a large chunk of enterprises which are small, who contribute very valuably
[Guest]: to job creation in the economy.
[Guest]: And you can see actually that over a period of time, gradually, the average young person
[Guest]: in India is now saying that the job they want is actually with a public sector firm.
[Guest]: They are no longer thinking about the job that they want is being with a private sector
[Guest]: firm.
[Guest]: Because we have gradually reshaped the economy to have more and more of the government and
[Guest]: less and less of the private sector.
[Guest]: And I think this is a fundamental misdirected course from which we have to correct our direction
[Guest]: and strike the right balance again.
[Guest]: And I think, if I could essentially give one final example here, which is that, you know,
[Guest]: what is often lost in the political thinking of the economic management of the country
[Guest]: is that a small share of taxes of a larger pie may be much bigger than having a larger
[Guest]: tax percentage of a very small pie.
[Guest]: And you know, basically, what it's saying is that there's a simple concept in economics
[Guest]: that if you tax too much, at some point, the private investments collapse so quickly, that
[Guest]: actually the economy shrinks.
[Guest]: And even though your percentage tax rate is high, actually, you don't collect much tax
[Guest]: revenue in the first place.
[Guest]: And so, beyond a point, your desire to collect more and more taxes backfires.
[Guest]: Now, I'm not saying that we don't need to improve our tax collection in a very fundamental
[Guest]: sense.
[Guest]: What I'm trying to say is that repression of the economy through public sector banks,
[Guest]: through fiscal dominance of the central bank, through excessive borrowings and crowding
[Guest]: out of private sector enterprise, all of these are forms of taxes, implicit taxes that are
[Guest]: being imposed on the rest of the economy.
[Guest]: And in sum total, they are now so large that the pie is actually shrinking.
[Guest]: And even though the repression is very high, in the end, the government is worse off, because
[Guest]: actually the pie is shrinking at a faster pace than you are benefiting from the pie
[Guest]: in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, the reason many people miss this profound insight is that the whole
[Amit Varma]: idea that a pie grows or can shrink feels counterintuitive in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: our brains evolved at a time where, you know, in prehistoric times, you lived in tribes
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, up to 100 to 150 people, there was natural scarcity all around.
[Amit Varma]: So we've evolved to think of the world in zero-sum ways.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that, you know, every transaction leaves both parties better off and the value
[Amit Varma]: in a society goes up and the pie can grow is deeply counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: Another sort of aspect in your book, which, you know, I was reminded of earlier in the
[Amit Varma]: show when you spoke about the proverb, where if the raja is a vaipari, the raja becomes
[Amit Varma]: bhikari, was, you know, again, what the ownership of public sector banks does as a whole, where
[Amit Varma]: the government is not only a participant through the banks, but also the regulator of the banks
[Amit Varma]: and the perverse incentives in play.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I'll quote from your book where you write, on the one hand, the overarching
[Amit Varma]: presence of public sector banks, other large state-owned financial institutions, and state-owned
[Amit Varma]: enterprises creates the incentive that the government dominates the central bank and
[Amit Varma]: its financial sector policies to affect outcomes for the entities that it owns and for its
[Amit Varma]: borrowing programs.
[Amit Varma]: This skews the market terms against the private sector and distracts the central bank from
[Amit Varma]: its long-term policy goals, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this also affects the private players then, as you later point out, quote, the government
[Amit Varma]: has incentives to influence policies as such and that it is not at arm's length from the
[Amit Varma]: regulators, drives the private sector into hyperactive lobbying, read an overdose of
[Amit Varma]: consultations with the government and regulators.
[Amit Varma]: This in turn induces an overall culture in the system of putting in place business-friendly
[Amit Varma]: policies that are pro incumbents at the cost of market-friendly policies that encourage
[Amit Varma]: creative destruction, asset reallocation, ease of doing business, and new entry, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: Which I think, you know, and I wanted to read this out and it's an important point to make
[Amit Varma]: because in the popular imagination, most people conflate business-friendly and market-friendly.
[Amit Varma]: The two are often contradictory because what is business-friendly is if you keep competition
[Amit Varma]: out and that's not necessarily good for the people at large or for society.
[Amit Varma]: That's crony capitalism.
[Amit Varma]: And what is good for the market is that you have this dynamism that leads to creative
[Amit Varma]: destruction, easy entry and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But the way the system is set up and a lot of it has to do with, you know, the ownership
[Amit Varma]: of public sector banks, you know, it seems inevitable, almost destined to just play out
[Amit Varma]: this way.
[Amit Varma]: What are sort of your thoughts on this and how difficult is it to eventually move away
[Amit Varma]: from it?
[Amit Varma]: Like you pointed out in an interview that look, it is possible for public sector banks
[Amit Varma]: to get sold.
[Amit Varma]: It happened all over Southeast Asia, but it took a massive crisis for it to happen.
[Amit Varma]: Now we can't hope for a crisis.
[Amit Varma]: There doesn't seem to be much coming from the demand side of the political marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, are things bleak for you, unless they get really bleak and we have a crisis?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: See, in the end, we have to recognize the costs of running the system the way it is.
[Guest]: I think, see, the reason why a part of the narrative hasn't shifted around to reforming
[Guest]: the public sector banking, you know, most people don't even realize that these banks
[Guest]: were nationalized, most of them in 60s and 70s in two waves.
[Guest]: They used to be private banks earlier.
[Guest]: It was done under the political objective of running government's programs for development
[Guest]: and financial inclusion.
[Guest]: And lo and behold, after close to 50 years of their existence, we are still at barely
[Guest]: 60% of credit to GDP ratio, much lower than developed countries.
[Guest]: Where are their losses?
[Guest]: Are they in financial inclusion loans?
[Guest]: No, they are in loans to the largest industrial firms.
[Guest]: That is where their biggest losses have come from.
[Guest]: So they have failed on that front.
[Guest]: In fact, increasingly, their quality of deposit service and account and branch services is
[Guest]: so weak that even their deposit share is actually shrinking.
[Guest]: So depositors are now voting with their feet, gradually by saying, listen, I would rather
[Guest]: bank with well capitalized, good service providing better technology run private bank than with
[Guest]: public sector banks.
[Guest]: So I think my sense is this has been a disaster in the making for a while, the public sector
[Guest]: banking enterprise.
[Guest]: We quote in the paper with Dr. Rajan that we have injected more than 4 trillion rupees
[Guest]: of capital over the last 10 years.
[Guest]: And the opportunity cost of that, because you could have invested this capital in the
[Guest]: market index or in a private sector banking index as two comparisons, would be anything
[Guest]: in the range of three to three and a half lakh crores.
[Guest]: This is a hundred billion dollars, if we had that available with us, you know, we could
[Guest]: have done such a more significant stimulus for relief and repair of the COVID affected
[Guest]: economy.
[Guest]: Now, why is the narrative not shifting?
[Guest]: The narrative is not shifting partly because this public sector enterprises have become
[Guest]: cozy jobs for a part of the middle class in India.
[Guest]: You know, you get these secure jobs, they are not as well paying as in the private sector,
[Guest]: but you have the job security because these entities aren't going away.
[Guest]: But now the costs of actually keeping them in good shape have become so high, because
[Guest]: the government balance sheets have expanded on other fronts and the losses they've made
[Guest]: are very large, that actually it's not at all clear that these entities can even grow
[Guest]: and provide the kind of security that was possible to provide earlier.
[Guest]: You know, take the example of Air India, or take the example of the public sector banks
[Guest]: that are losing their market share of deposits.
[Guest]: You know, it's not going to be that pleasant to be employed in these firms going forward.
[Guest]: So I think the labour itself has to recognise that they would have more interesting growth
[Guest]: potential, even if some more risk on the job, if some of these entities were in fact, better
[Guest]: governed at arm's length from the government and eventually reprivatised.
[Guest]: The second problem that always gets mentioned is, oh, you know, ultimately, when a crisis
[Guest]: happens, you have to backstop the banks anyways, then what is the problem with public sector
[Guest]: banks?
[Guest]: And it's a clever argument, but it's wrong on many counts.
[Guest]: And let me explain three counts.
[Guest]: First, yes, deposit insurance is in place all over the world.
[Guest]: But the reason why it's not a blanket deposit insurance is because there are capacities
[Guest]: to how much the government can provide insurance.
[Guest]: The sovereign can go on the brink, if it takes on too much private liabilities of the system.
[Guest]: Therefore, there's a line drawn on how much deposit insurance will get provided.
[Guest]: And that deposit insurance is provided even to private banks.
[Guest]: So why do you have to suffer all the inefficiencies, misgovernance, behest lending, you know, lack
[Guest]: of adequate technology, etc, of a public sector banking system that has, quote unquote, as
[Guest]: I said, failed us for 50 years in attainment of what it was supposed to be.
[Guest]: So you know, you can strengthen your deposit insurance system, rather than actually having
[Guest]: to suffer all the consequences of government ownership.
[Guest]: Second, by keeping them as public sector banks, as I explained in the chapter, you actually
[Guest]: through fiscal dominance, keep the quality of the regulation weak at all times.
[Guest]: And this also means weaker rules on private sector banks.
[Guest]: We did not adopt better accounting standards, such as the IFRS or INDEAS, which would require
[Guest]: provisioning for losses in anticipation.
[Guest]: And now even our private banks are actually not providing as much in anticipation as we
[Guest]: would like.
[Guest]: So there is a common reduced denominator or a race to the bottom in the regulation of
[Guest]: the financial system, because you have weakly managed, weakly governed, weakly capitalized
[Guest]: public sector banks in the system.
[Guest]: So the entire system is made worse off because of their presence in my view.
[Guest]: And third, and most importantly, is about the efficiency of the allocation of capital
[Guest]: in the economy.
[Guest]: As I explained earlier, because of the presence of public sector banks, capital is getting
[Guest]: inefficiently allocated, either to distressed borrowers in order to first gold plate them
[Guest]: in good times, and then allow them to continue to borrow through as zombies in bad times.
[Guest]: So you get zombie lending, or you get lending to the government, lazy lending.
[Guest]: And the middle, which is the healthy firms, MSMEs, and the households, they are getting
[Guest]: creamed out because they have to borrow at much higher costs of borrowing.
[Guest]: Now this has implications on productivity, investments, high quality jobs being created
[Guest]: in the economy.
[Guest]: And ultimately, even though as a saver in a public sector bank, or as an employee in
[Guest]: a public sector bank, in the narrow, I may feel good about their presence, the entire
[Guest]: economy is paying a huge cost for this.
[Guest]: And I tell everyone who defends the public sector banking enterprise on basis of the
[Guest]: safety of the deposit, or on the basis of the job that it has created for them, I ask
[Guest]: them, if you had a child, where would you want your child to work when he grows up?
[Guest]: And you know, in many cases, the answer would be that they would rather have the child be
[Guest]: working in the best private bank out there, rather than in an Air India or in a public
[Guest]: sector bank out there.
[Guest]: So I think my sense is that this has come at a colossal cost to the economy.
[Guest]: Even those who are inside are a bit blinded by the fact that they are leaving behind a
[Guest]: much worse economy for the youth and the children, including their own.
[Guest]: Even though privately, some of them might be better off themselves with the presence
[Guest]: of these enterprises.
[Guest]: I think it's time to call it a day.
[Guest]: I think the sooner we stop bleeding this wound, the better it is.
[Guest]: In my Feb 2017 speech on NPAs, I gave this analogy that we keep festering this wound
[Guest]: more and more.
[Guest]: And now we run the risk that we may have to not just impute some organs, but also, you
[Guest]: know, we may have to deal with the side effects of the wound spreading to other parts of the
[Guest]: body.
[Guest]: I think it's time to recognise this is a failed experiment.
[Guest]: It was entirely political when it was undertaken as nationalisation in 60s and 70s.
[Guest]: It has led to poor returns on taxpayer money.
[Guest]: It has led to poor quality of deposit franchise servicing.
[Guest]: It has led to peak central banking apparatus in supervision and regulation.
[Guest]: It's a form of cancer, in my opinion, it is.
[Guest]: I have no two views about it in spite of the resistance that has been provided in many
[Guest]: parts of the society, because you have to listen to the facts on the table.
[Guest]: And now a multiplicity of books have been written explaining how bad it is to have come
[Guest]: out this year, another one is coming out later this year.
[Guest]: This is a common theme that's running through my book and my paper on how to reform the
[Guest]: banks with Dr. Rajan, that government has to divest stakes, it has to improve the governance,
[Guest]: reprivatise some of these entities and prioritise some of the business models of the smaller
[Guest]: ones, so that they just do financial inclusion, like microcredit or microfinance institutions
[Guest]: rather than trying to be universal banks to the industrial firms of the country.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I couldn't agree with you more about bank nationalisation.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I often and this is something I feel strongly about most people I don't think understand
[Amit Varma]: that economic policy has real humanitarian consequences.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I look back on many of the economic policies of the Indira Gandhi period, bank
[Amit Varma]: nationalisations and so much else, you know, I think they kept millions of people in poverty
[Amit Varma]: for decades longer than necessary, which is, of course, an unseen effect and people don't
[Amit Varma]: get it.
[Amit Varma]: And what you're saying about this also holds true that not only are we kicking the can
[Amit Varma]: down the road, we are kicking the children down the road, this is going to affect, you
[Amit Varma]: know, future generations.
[Guest]: Yeah, if I could just add one point there, I mean, see, this is the beauty and the sadness
[Guest]: of the government balance sheet, right?
[Guest]: What is the beauty?
[Guest]: The beauty is that you can touch the individual and spread the cost across.
[Guest]: What is the tragedy of it?
[Guest]: The tragedy of it is that because you are spreading the losses around, you know, no
[Guest]: one really cares about it, it's someone else's problem.
[Guest]: And therefore, I think proper accounting of government balance sheet, preventing off balance
[Guest]: sheet accounting from masking the true picture of the government balance sheet, having an
[Guest]: independent fiscal council that will evaluate every single program of the government before
[Guest]: the budget is announced, you know, the 14 Finance Commission chaired by Dr. Reddy made
[Guest]: this very clear that the independent fiscal council should vet the programs before the
[Guest]: budget is announced, are the assumptions reasonable, what are going to be the recurring costs of
[Guest]: these programs, we can't just announce programs and then figure out what are going to be the
[Guest]: budgetary and financing implications of this.
[Guest]: And once you do this, once you do a proper accounting of what is the total borrowing
[Guest]: being undertaken by the government across centers, states, different center and state
[Guest]: owned enterprises, this is called as a public sector borrowing requirement.
[Guest]: Once you have a council that's vetting the reasonableness of the government budgets,
[Guest]: it will become very clear that the government is trying to do too much, it is pushing on
[Guest]: a string, the borrowing costs and borrowing amounts are very large.
[Guest]: And that we need to embark on a massive disinvestment program, the way we had it during 98 to 2003.
[Guest]: In all non-strategic sectors, the government needs to shed stakes, reprivatize wherever
[Guest]: possible, including in the financial sector, in the banking sector, the insurance sector,
[Guest]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't agree more.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book, of course, you lay out a bunch of ways in which, you know, we can fix
[Amit Varma]: the system now assuming and we'll come to the political economy later, but ignoring
[Amit Varma]: the political economy for the moment, assuming that all the politicians and bureaucrats fall
[Amit Varma]: in line.
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of steps among what you haven't already mentioned?
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of steps that should be done to fix the system to get it functional
[Guest]: again?
[Guest]: Yes, so I think I would say, you know, in my view, the fiscal stability and financial
[Guest]: stability are now almost joined at the hips.
[Guest]: You know, they are very deeply intertwined through this fiscal dominance channel, as
[Guest]: well as through the direct linkages between the two.
[Guest]: So first and foremost, I would say we need to be honest about our fiscal side, that,
[Guest]: you know, we need to spend right now in the midst of COVID, but that we didn't leave much
[Guest]: space for it because of the slippages pre-COVID.
[Guest]: And I think the best way to do this is to put in place an institutional fiscal reform
[Guest]: package, which gives credibility to the market investors and rating agencies that the country
[Guest]: means business, as far as consolidation and a reversal to better path is concerned in
[Guest]: the medium term, so that you can borrow more in the short term to meet the immediate fiscal
[Guest]: needs, you know, because you are on a better path.
[Guest]: But you know, we need to reorient for that the expenditure has to be growth focused.
[Guest]: So we need to reorient from subsidies towards infrastructure, health and education.
[Guest]: I would do a very deep analysis of the subsidies, there is a lot of wastage, a lot of money
[Guest]: gets spent in administration and financial enterprises that run and house the subsidies
[Guest]: on their balance sheets, rather than the subsidies being spent entirely in reaching the last
[Guest]: mile consumer or the citizen.
[Guest]: They can all be rolled perhaps into a universal basic income, and a lot of these inefficiencies
[Guest]: of administrative costs be economized, and that freed up space can be used to increase
[Guest]: the infrastructure and ease of doing business on the ground.
[Guest]: So I would say that's first part of the fiscal institutional package.
[Guest]: The second part of the package is something I wrote about in an op-ed in the Economic
[Guest]: Times.
[Guest]: And I just mentioned, we need an independent fiscal council.
[Guest]: And we need a transparent public sector borrowing requirement, the council should be non-partisan
[Guest]: or bipartisan, it should report to the parliament and not to the finance ministry.
[Guest]: And the public sector borrowing requirement should be calculated by the independent office
[Guest]: of the CAG.
[Guest]: Because if the government is producing these numbers itself, it becomes a prey to what
[Guest]: is the good hearts law, which is that, you know, if the measure by which I'm regulating
[Guest]: you can be manipulated by you, of course, the measure will have no economic meaning
[Guest]: or content in the first place, and which is what has happened.
[Guest]: We have a real deficit, and we have an official deficit, and the gap between the two has now
[Guest]: become very, very large, that we have to always talk about both in the same breath whenever
[Guest]: we speak about them.
[Guest]: That's two.
[Guest]: And third, I think we just need to undertake massive divestments, we need to unlock the
[Guest]: growth potential of so much enterprise space that has been captured by the public sector,
[Guest]: it would have the collateral benefit of reducing the government's borrowing programs, and putting
[Guest]: us on a better debt to GDP ratios.
[Guest]: Now, this requires conviction and commitment at the top in the government that this is
[Guest]: a better path in the long run, rather than continuing to repress the economy, which would
[Guest]: be necessary if we don't course correct on the fiscal front.
[Guest]: But I think, you know, the government is still in the early phase of the electoral cycle.
[Guest]: It has majority.
[Guest]: So I think this is the kind of transformational institutional reform that one would hope the
[Guest]: government would seriously undertake, or at least start debating and discussing.
[Guest]: Second, I would say we need significant reforms on the financial front.
[Guest]: I think something we pushed for when I was at the Central Bank, through a speech by Governor
[Guest]: Patel, is that the ownership of public sector banks, the regulation of public sector banks
[Guest]: should be ownership neutral, whether they are owned by the government or whether they
[Guest]: are in the private sector space, the Central Bank should be able to regulate and discipline
[Guest]: them in the same way, including replacement of management and, you know, dilution of the
[Guest]: government stakes if government is not injecting the required capital.
[Guest]: This way, you know, problems happen even in private banks, there are idiosyncratic governance
[Guest]: failures as we have seen, but at least the Central Bank is able to take corrective actions
[Guest]: to fix that.
[Guest]: That is, that's not possible right now in public sector banks.
[Guest]: Second, we do need a calibrated, comprehensive plan for public sector presence in banks,
[Guest]: insurance and other non-banks.
[Guest]: This would mean, I think, divesting stakes below majority to start with, then using that
[Guest]: time to improve governance standards by becoming arm's length.
[Guest]: In the paper with Dr. Rajan, we suggest creating state-linked banks rather than public sector
[Guest]: banks where you basically move all the ownership of the banks, etc., into an investment managing
[Guest]: arm.
[Guest]: It's almost like a sovereign wealth fund, so to speak, which would be run by professionals
[Guest]: rather than actually run by the bureaucracy.
[Guest]: And you know, they would basically just appoint independent board members and then let these
[Guest]: boards run these entities rather than having a lot of control through a department of the
[Guest]: government as we currently have.
[Guest]: And third, I would say that we need to continue with the process of strengthening bank supervision
[Guest]: and regulation.
[Guest]: This would mean actually creating buffers of capital in good times.
[Guest]: See, even right now, we are doing a lot of restructuring and relief for the borrowers,
[Guest]: which is required because of the COVID's unanticipated and unprecedented, large nature of the shock.
[Guest]: But we are not raising capital into banks on a war footing.
[Guest]: Large private banks are doing it on their own, but what about others?
[Guest]: What about public sector banks?
[Guest]: Why aren't we asking them for capital?
[Guest]: If the losses start materializing when the debt moratoria expire, how are we going to
[Guest]: capitalize these losses?
[Guest]: Why aren't we planning for it ahead of time?
[Guest]: Because if we are doing this recapitalization when the economy is coming out of COVID, banks
[Guest]: are not going to be in a position to lend that time because they will still be dealing
[Guest]: with the legacy loans problem.
[Guest]: So if we learn the lesson from the last five, six years, we should be on a war footing capitalizing
[Guest]: the banks right now rather than leaving it for later.
[Guest]: So that I would say is point three.
[Guest]: So the first point was ownership neutral regulation of banks.
[Guest]: Second is a comprehensive plan to restructure the public sector banks.
[Guest]: And third, I would say capital, capital, capital on an anticipated basis rather than backloaded
[Guest]: basis.
[Guest]: And lastly, you know, everyone has been saying this, we are done with milking the fruits
[Guest]: of 90s reforms and capitalizing on the divestment gains of 98 to 2003.
[Guest]: I think we need a new round of reforms, at least on, in their spirit, several parts of
[Guest]: the Farm Bill to me seem to be in the right direction.
[Guest]: I don't know about the process through which it was implemented, but focusing on the economics
[Guest]: of the Farm Bill, it is trying to actually get the farmers closer to the direct market
[Guest]: prices rather than having, giving a lot of power to the intermediary wholesalers in between.
[Guest]: I think that was a problem.
[Guest]: And hopefully, this is a step in the right direction.
[Guest]: But you know, farming is only a small part of the Indian economy in a GDP sense, it's
[Guest]: very large in a job sense, but it is not the best jobs India can create.
[Guest]: We need the rest of the private sector in services and manufacturing to get an even
[Guest]: further boost.
[Guest]: Again, the labor laws are a step in the right direction.
[Guest]: But to get manufacturing away from China, as the world is moving away from China or
[Guest]: diversifying supply chains, we are going to have to make land transactions to be done
[Guest]: more transparently and readily.
[Guest]: So we certainly need reforms there, we need better ease of doing business on the ground
[Guest]: in terms of requiring fewer government clearances, and reducing that implicit taxation in the
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: And third, we just need better infrastructure.
[Guest]: Even now, we barely keep up all the time, every time I go to Mumbai, I feel it always
[Guest]: does enough when I'm on the roads.
[Guest]: In certain parts of the country, the roads are very good, but in many parts of the countries,
[Guest]: they are still very uneven.
[Guest]: And you know, to have a national manufacturing and delivery and logistics system, you know,
[Guest]: the logistics, there is a lot of improvement happening because of use of tech, etc.
[Guest]: But I think the physical parts of the logistics, the physical infrastructure that's underlying
[Guest]: it can still be improved in terms of airports, airports, roads, trains, and so on.
[Guest]: So I think we need fiscal, financial and real sector reforms that are truly transformational
[Guest]: to me, this is like a 1990s moment.
[Guest]: We are not in a crisis, one does not want a crisis to be required to force these decisions
[Guest]: on us.
[Guest]: I think we can use a bit of our sagacity in being able to see forward, visualize what
[Guest]: the stress may be down the line, visualize what a low growth would mean for the youth
[Guest]: and the children of the economy down the line, visualize that if we have to do it and sell
[Guest]: our enterprises in the midst of a crisis, like a Southeast Asian crisis, it would be
[Guest]: the first time actually to plan for their reprivatization instead laid out as a calibrated
[Guest]: strategy ahead of time.
[Guest]: If this is done in a decisive manner as a package, I think it will increase the confidence
[Guest]: and the investor sentiment towards India tremendously, and enable the government to undertake more
[Guest]: fiscal expenditure in the short run, without actually there being a backlash in the market.
[Guest]: So if I could give an analogy, you know, I like watching birds, it is something I learned
[Guest]: with a group of naturalists when I was doing my RBI term, but the naturalists were also
[Guest]: very adept at explaining the rest of the nature to you.
[Guest]: And once we were observing an insect, I think it was a praying mantis, which was trapped
[Guest]: in a spider's web, and they explained to me how the spider builds the web in the first
[Guest]: job of the spider is that it actually makes a massive leap from wherever it is sitting
[Guest]: on to where it wants to be on at the other end of the web.
[Guest]: And to do that, it basically squats and uses all the strength of its thighs to make that
[Guest]: one big jump to lay that first web across.
[Guest]: It knows what the target point is, it has to make a big leap.
[Guest]: Now once you have built that first bridge to your target point, building the rest of
[Guest]: the web around it becomes very, very easy.
[Guest]: And I think India is at that kind of a moment, we have to use all the strength that we have,
[Guest]: figure out where we want to be, give a clear path, build a bridge to that by announcing
[Guest]: the right sets of reforms.
[Guest]: Once we show that path as being our trajectory, building the rest of the growth around it
[Guest]: will become much, much easier.
[Guest]: And I think we don't have to be paralyzed, we don't have to be in inaction mode, we also
[Guest]: don't have to gamble.
[Guest]: We also don't have to say, oh, we will just spend and we will worry about what happens
[Guest]: later.
[Guest]: No, we can actually anchor whatever medium term long run need to be with the right fiscal,
[Guest]: financial and real site package.
[Guest]: And once you do that anchoring, we would actually be on a very prudent and safe path in my view.
[Guest]: I don't see why India can't grow at a very good rate, given the demographics, given the
[Guest]: potential, given the hardworking nature and the aspiration of our youth.
[Guest]: I think it's a matter of course correction, and being on the right trajectory, avoiding
[Guest]: the regression to the centralized, nationalized state, and allowing the private sector, both
[Guest]: in terms of space, and incentives to flourish in a manner that it did during the 90s and
[Amit Varma]: early 2000s.
[Amit Varma]: That metaphor of state as spider is quite awesome, because you know, like some spiders,
[Amit Varma]: the state can also be rather predatory.
[Amit Varma]: Now, before I go on to talking about the political economy of this and the practicality and likelihood
[Amit Varma]: of these kinds of changes happening, I want to take another tangent, because which came
[Amit Varma]: to mind when you sort of mentioned the farm bills, that what happens in the discourse
[Amit Varma]: in India, because, you know, everything is so polarized, and everything is so tribal,
[Amit Varma]: is that typically, we have chosen our tribe.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we will stick with it regardless of what the issue is, for example, what's
[Amit Varma]: giving me what's almost ironic now is that a lot of the people in the Congress opposing
[Amit Varma]: the farm bills are completely oblivious to the fact that in their manifesto in the election
[Amit Varma]: last year, they had very similar proposals and intellectually, many of them in private
[Amit Varma]: will tell you that, you know, yeah, this is a step in the right direction.
[Amit Varma]: And ditto, there was a lot of reflexive opposition to the labor reforms a few months ago, only
[Amit Varma]: because they came from, you know, a particular government, while earlier across parties is
[Amit Varma]: pretty much been a consensus on the kind of reforms needed, especially since our labor
[Amit Varma]: laws hurt workers.
[Amit Varma]: So does that then become an issue?
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand, we want to build a constituency for these kinds of ideas.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, is it incredibly frustrating to see that in these polarized times, people
[Amit Varma]: just respond at this base tribal level, where they're not looking at the ideas themselves,
[Amit Varma]: they are just seeing which is a party they happen to be associated with at this moment
[Amit Varma]: in time.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, any criticism of this government will, regardless of the merit of the criticism,
[Amit Varma]: be attacked by a lot of people as being anti-national and being whatever and, you know, the whole
[Amit Varma]: discourse just gets toxic.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something you've thought about?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that's unfortunately, the politics of the times we are in, it's not just in India,
[Guest]: it's actually all over the world.
[Guest]: I don't know if you saw the presidential debate yesterday, but, you know, it was probably,
[Guest]: I don't know whether it was tragical or comical.
[Guest]: But it certainly epitomized everything that you said about the highly polarized nature
[Guest]: of the politics at the present point of time in the world.
[Guest]: I think the only way out is to keep sending soundbites of reason.
[Guest]: I think we need more economic analysis of these kinds of reforms being laid out in a
[Guest]: dispassionate, objective, nonpartisan way.
[Guest]: I think agri-economists such as, you know, Professor Ashok Gulati at ICRIAR or Dr. Ramesh
[Guest]: Chand at the NIPFP, they need to, they need to be read, they need to be heard, they need
[Guest]: to explain what exactly were the failures in the existing system and how they are going
[Guest]: to be tackled.
[Guest]: Of course, it would help if the government in the same week, when they remove onions
[Guest]: from the Essential Commodities Act, don't then ban exports, sending exactly the opposite
[Guest]: signal at the same time.
[Guest]: But you know, we just need, we need more economic discourse, we need more discussions along
[Guest]: these lines.
[Guest]: And perhaps there needs to be greater preparation through written documents, laying out what
[Guest]: the failures are with facts and data on the ground.
[Guest]: What are the reforms, what are the options on the table, what are their pros and cons
[Guest]: and why specific reforms are being chosen?
[Guest]: I think it would be nice if there was a little bit of a discipline of going about this in
[Guest]: an organized manner with documents.
[Guest]: See, in the past, even though we never implemented many of the committee's reports, we used to
[Guest]: set up committees at national level, they would be chaired, or at the central banking
[Guest]: level, they would be chaired by the highest quality, highest integrity bureaucrats, former
[Guest]: central bankers, and so on.
[Guest]: And they used to provide a blueprint.
[Guest]: Even now, in my piece with Dr. Rajan, we refer to the Narsimhan Committee of the 90s, the
[Guest]: P. J. Nayak Committee of the 2014, and maybe there is some usefulness in the bureaucracy
[Guest]: of actually creating records of proposals which are very carefully laid out, reasoned
[Guest]: for, analyzed with their merits and demerits, and so on.
[Guest]: I think that is the only way forward that I see.
[Guest]: I think, in a way, I feel quite strongly that we are at a moment when transformational reforms
[Guest]: are needed.
[Guest]: There is a sign that some of this is being undertaken in the farm and the labor front.
[Guest]: I would add three more pillars to that on the fiscal institutions, the financial sector,
[Guest]: notably the public sector, banking and presence in insurance, pension, etc.
[Guest]: And third, on the real side, especially on infrastructure front.
[Guest]: I think if we can add these three pillars, I think we would be more decisively on a course
[Guest]: correction from the last 10, 12 years that we've had of, I would say, patchy growth,
[Guest]: short-term growth, backloaded with macroeconomic or financial misdirection, short-term pump
[Guest]: priming of the economy with down-the-line losses that are materializing in a very significant
[Guest]: way, constant fudging and band-aid kind of solutions rather than decisive action to stop
[Guest]: the wounds from festering and spreading to other parts of the economy.
[Guest]: I think we need to do something very decisive.
[Guest]: And I think if we do that, the 90s should show us that there will be fruits that will
[Guest]: bear out for at least a couple of decades if we do that in a decisive way.
[Guest]: I think, I hope that COVID is not just a difficult humanitarian crisis for the country, it is,
[Guest]: and tragic as it is, it perhaps also offers an opportunity to also actually fix many of
[Guest]: the things that were not right even pre-COVID.
[Guest]: And if we do that, at least the crisis would be, you know, we would have utilized the crisis
[Guest]: to the best advantage of the economy under the circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, no, and just sort of thinking aloud and adding to, you know, what we were talking
[Amit Varma]: about, about discourse is that I think people also are attracted to simple narratives and
[Amit Varma]: therefore attracted to easy binaries.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what's happened in the Farm Bills Week was very complex.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's a means versus ends issue.
[Amit Varma]: I think the way they pushed it through was anti-democratic.
[Amit Varma]: There are issues that you can raise against the bills by saying, hey, what about states
[Amit Varma]: rights and these should have been left to the states.
[Amit Varma]: Equally, many of the, you know, the details of the bill are great and is in fact what
[Amit Varma]: the Congress had in their manifesto last year, which makes it ironic.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, they also did the incredibly stupid thing of banning onion exports
[Amit Varma]: same week.
[Amit Varma]: So God knows what was happening.
[Amit Varma]: So the point is, it's all very complex and nuanced, there are things to praise, there
[Amit Varma]: are things to not praise, there are things to withhold judgment on, but we don't have
[Amit Varma]: an appetite for that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, before we kind of wind it up and I'll leave sort of the political economy
[Amit Varma]: question for the last, but I'll get to it by taking a segue back into the personal where
[Amit Varma]: you had once said that you chose the life of an academic because, you know, you were
[Amit Varma]: in charge of your day.
[Amit Varma]: You can wake up when you want, you can wear what you want, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you, you know, chose to give up that life of an academic and actually
[Amit Varma]: come and work in the Reserve Bank of India and, you know, so on.
[Amit Varma]: What drove you to do that?
[Amit Varma]: You know, were there problems that you thought you needed to solve and that you could contribute
[Amit Varma]: to?
[Amit Varma]: And what was it like the experience of then joining the government?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how was it different from what your expectations were?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: See, as I said, for someone like me who was studying banking crises, banking regulation,
[Guest]: financial stability, I think a central banking job in some ways a natural culmination.
[Guest]: You know, at least at some point, you want to be able to take your, your analysis, your
[Guest]: research, your expertise to implementing things in a policy sense, a central banking job can
[Guest]: be fairly academic, as far as allowing you to have the conceptual framework to solve
[Guest]: the problems is concerned.
[Guest]: So I'd always thought this would be a nice thing to do, I engage a fair bit with central
[Guest]: banks in an advisory capacity.
[Guest]: Of course, most of the times advisory roles have no executive decision making capacity.
[Guest]: Of course, in the end at a central bank, the governor and the board are the ultimate executives
[Guest]: who are in charge.
[Guest]: But you know, deputy governors can shape the agenda a fair bit in their own respective
[Guest]: portfolios.
[Guest]: And I was fortunate that I was allowed to have a voice even in portfolios such as bank
[Guest]: regulation, which were not under me actually, in fact, it became one of my thrust areas
[Guest]: as the face of the RPI on some of this, even though I would say Deputy Governor N S Vishwanathan
[Guest]: was the main person driving the regulation side when we were there.
[Guest]: So I think it was just a very natural thing to do, the opportunity came about, I applied
[Guest]: for the job, I had a video conference interview with the appointments committee of the Government
[Guest]: of India, it was very serious grilling, I felt inside I was the right person for the
[Guest]: job.
[Guest]: Of course, I didn't know who else was applying.
[Guest]: So you don't know whether in a relative sense, you would look right or not.
[Guest]: But in an absolute sense, I thought I was the right person for the job.
[Guest]: And even when I finished my term, I still think, you know, it was a very good fit, I,
[Guest]: you know, sometimes when you are doing what is exactly right for you, there is a magical
[Guest]: feeling inside you of satisfaction, that this comes naturally to you, the job requires you
[Guest]: to do certain things, and you are able to bring all of your experience, knowledge, and
[Guest]: the ability to work with teams.
[Guest]: And I think it was all kind of very nice, I think I enjoyed my experience thoroughly.
[Guest]: I thank the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India for this opportunity.
[Guest]: I think I had a great time working with the staff at the RBI, I hold them in the highest
[Guest]: regard, both for their hard work as well as integrity.
[Guest]: And I think I couldn't have asked for anything more.
[Guest]: You know, it was also personally very rewarding for me, because I spent two and a half years
[Guest]: with my parents.
[Guest]: It was also personally challenging with my wife and son were in New York.
[Guest]: So I was going back and forth a lot, and you know, I, at some point, I just got better
[Guest]: at managing the jet lag.
[Guest]: But it was quite crazy.
[Guest]: Now, when I think about it, you know, to have a family 10 and a half hours away or nine
[Guest]: and a half hours away in a timing sense, and you know, total travel time 20 hours each
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: Like sometimes I used to come to New York for a day or 36 hours and go back, I had my
[Guest]: son was in a play and I really wanted to watch one show.
[Guest]: So I remember I landed on Saturday morning, I watched the show at 2pm and I took the 8pm
[Guest]: flight back because I had to be at RBI on the job.
[Guest]: So it was quite crazy in some ways.
[Guest]: But you know, sometimes you are in the midst of things and costs don't actually bear upon
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: So that was I would say second.
[Guest]: The third, see, I have a slightly different take on central banking than what a lot of
[Guest]: central bankers do.
[Guest]: A lot of central bankers say even if they've been academics in the past, that real world
[Guest]: is very complex.
[Guest]: You can't use your frameworks, you have to be willing to think on the fly, etc.
[Guest]: And of course, all of that is true.
[Guest]: But I disagree with not being able to use frameworks.
[Guest]: In my view, it is so complex, the problems are so complex that unless you discipline
[Guest]: yourself and think through an organizing framework, it doesn't have to be academic.
[Guest]: But you do need to do analytical thinking that clarifies what are the big issues, what
[Guest]: is the key diagnosis of the underlying problem?
[Guest]: And based on that diagnosis, what is the ideal reform or policy that you want?
[Guest]: What are the political or other constraints in the system?
[Guest]: And what is the best way to actually then advocate for change and make it happen?
[Guest]: Sometimes you can make the change yourself.
[Guest]: Sometimes you have to work with others to make the change.
[Guest]: My approach was that my speeches, which are combined in the book along with this new detailed
[Guest]: introductory chapter, I thought my speeches were basically an advocacy for change.
[Guest]: They were sometimes written right from first principles.
[Guest]: Some of them are a little more advanced.
[Guest]: But whatever way, invariably at the end, whether it was resolution of bank loans, setting up
[Guest]: of a public credit registry to satirize and democratize credit in India, whether it was
[Guest]: about striking the right balance between the government and the central bank, whatever
[Guest]: the issue be, they were always meant to actually provide a diagnosis of the key underlying
[Guest]: problem and then push for a change.
[Guest]: My ideas may not have been the best ones, but I think if you push for change, you advocate
[Guest]: for change, what you want is a public discourse, a public debate.
[Guest]: And if that bubbles up, then you get better ideas and you get some movement towards the
[Guest]: right solutions.
[Guest]: As you rightly pointed out, it's not just about a central bank.
[Guest]: It's about the fact that there is common man and the economy, there is the government.
[Guest]: And very often the narratives have to be brought together to meet at a point where politics
[Guest]: and the economics align with what, in my case, the central bank would do.
[Guest]: And I think building that narrative is important.
[Guest]: It's key to lend it some reason and an objectivity in the decision making.
[Guest]: And I think that's a part of the challenge.
[Guest]: And I think I'm very happy, I'm very grateful to the governors I worked with, especially
[Guest]: Governor Patel for giving me a lot of freedom to speak as a deputy governor and sort of
[Guest]: being this agent for change.
[Guest]: And I see the book as just a continuation.
[Guest]: I wasn't sure when I left the Reserve Bank of India, whether I would do something like
[Guest]: this as a historical account.
[Guest]: It's mainly my speeches, but with that historical account as the common lessons I learned in
[Guest]: the introductory chapter on fiscal dominance, I thought I may just let it be and move on.
[Guest]: But the more I spoke to the former governors and deputy governors and reflected myself,
[Guest]: it became clear that you are on a continuous trajectory of pushing for change.
[Guest]: There are no full stops.
[Guest]: You want to use your knowledge, experience, historical account to try and constantly push
[Guest]: the system into the right direction.
[Guest]: I think I've been very dispassionate and objective in my discussion of the problems.
[Guest]: I've tried to just push for economics wherever they are well grounded.
[Guest]: And whatever I see as the clear stream of reason emerging out of that thinking.
[Guest]: And you know, hopefully it travels to the right place.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I was just quite alarmed to know that you had contemplated not writing the book
[Amit Varma]: because on my own behalf and on behalf of many of my listeners who I think are surely
[Amit Varma]: going to be future readers of your book, I want to thank you for writing it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, while you were just talking about why you took up the assignment, you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that, you know, one of the things that reassured you was that you knew you would
[Amit Varma]: have a voice.
[Amit Varma]: And I have heard you say elsewhere, and I found it very poignant, that your exit was
[Amit Varma]: a kind of voice.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in an interview that you did with Ira Duggal, you, you know, spoke about
[Amit Varma]: the time you left and the sort of how you push back against the short termism or whatever
[Amit Varma]: pressures there were.
[Amit Varma]: And you said, quote, when these came to a head, the central bank has to have the ability
[Amit Varma]: to say no when that is not in the public interest.
[Amit Varma]: We did say no, we put up exactly the right defense and resistance that needed to be put
[Amit Varma]: up in the face of such pressures.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever defense we put up was entirely in the public interest.
[Amit Varma]: The country is far better off that our banks are not in worse shape than what they could
[Amit Varma]: have been given the pressures on us at that time.
[Amit Varma]: I think it came at a huge professional cost to some of us.
[Amit Varma]: But given the mandate of the RBI, and given what we interpreted that mandate to be, we
[Amit Varma]: thought we had to pay the price, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: There are a couple of questions here, and one is, of course, the question about the
[Amit Varma]: political economy itself, that you go in there, you have a clear framework, you're professionals,
[Amit Varma]: you know what is the right thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: But all of these reforms that you laid out earlier in the episode, and that you've, you
[Amit Varma]: know, elaborated upon so lucidly in your book, how likely are they to happen?
[Amit Varma]: Just given the incentives of the political players in question, number two, how hard
[Amit Varma]: was that struggle for you?
[Amit Varma]: Did it get frustrating?
[Amit Varma]: Did it seem rewarding at times?
[Amit Varma]: And thirdly, what kind of struck me is that, you know, when I think of the way some of
[Amit Varma]: the protagonists here involved, really fought for the good ideas, which in this case by
[Amit Varma]: V, I presume you meant yourself and Governor Patel, you know, in a democratic republic,
[Amit Varma]: we can't depend on people of principle to come and do the right thing.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we need rules of the game to be laid down, everybody who comes won't fight
[Amit Varma]: for the same principles.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, some will toe the line, and that's just over a long term, that's completely
[Amit Varma]: inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of it?
[Amit Varma]: One, was it a futile battle?
[Amit Varma]: Two, can the battle actually be won given the way the system is already designed in
[Amit Varma]: the way it exists and the way everybody's incentives are?
[Amit Varma]: And this is basically my penultimate question.
[Amit Varma]: I'll have one more after this.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, let's go through the three questions in sequence, because it's a very
[Guest]: interesting thread, actually.
[Guest]: So first, I would say, I think the question to me is, I think this goes back to the theme
[Guest]: you have been raising on and off.
[Guest]: The question to me is, what is it that the people of India want?
[Guest]: Is economics on their agenda or not?
[Guest]: Do they want growth or not?
[Guest]: Do they want their children and youth to have high skilled jobs down the line or not?
[Guest]: Or do they really want what looks like easy distribution of subsidies by the government,
[Guest]: low growth, low productivity, and, you know, cozy public sector banking jobs, which are
[Guest]: highly unproductive for the rest of the economy and eventually also for themselves and their
[Guest]: children and youth down the line?
[Guest]: I think this is a deeper question I just want to raise.
[Guest]: I would think the economics should be a lot more on people's minds than what it seems
[Guest]: to be.
[Guest]: Maybe it is, but it is not getting vocalized as much.
[Guest]: There are distractions of various types, and maybe they are taking over.
[Guest]: But as we said, the right reforms will happen when the politics and economics aligned or
[Guest]: when they are thrust upon us by an unfortunate shock or a crisis.
[Guest]: It's better to be in the first situation where politics and economics align and to that everyone
[Guest]: has a responsibility.
[Guest]: I think they have to want the reforms, they have to want the economic change for the long
[Guest]: run.
[Guest]: I think the narratives, the public discourse, the debate are an attempt to bring together
[Guest]: that confluence of politics and economics.
[Guest]: But I do think that no one individual can just simply relegate the responsibility to
[Guest]: everyone else in the end.
[Guest]: Second, was it frustrating?
[Guest]: Not at all.
[Guest]: You know, I expected the problems to be severe, as I told you, that India chapter in my Guarantee
[Guest]: to Fail book, just yesterday I read it again, and I actually felt that, oh, actually the
[Guest]: same thing happened, you know, it all happened all over again, whatever the problems flagged
[Amit Varma]: in that chapter after eight or nine years.
[Guest]: And sometimes that is the beauty of economics, that when you learn robust lessons from past
[Guest]: experiences, and you are able to extrapolate with the right caution, you actually realize
[Guest]: that the underlying economics and political forces are likely to play out unless you fundamentally
[Guest]: shift them.
[Guest]: I think the pressures that we faced were anticipated.
[Guest]: I think they were a bit more, if I could say, they were a bit more open, and maybe a bit
[Guest]: more concentrated because of the short term pressures that we were alluding to in 2018.
[Guest]: It was also a challenging period because there were some other shocks, you know, oil prices
[Guest]: were going through the roof between April to October 18, creating a current account
[Guest]: deficit problem.
[Guest]: We had the non-bank finance sector and related banking sector issues in September, August,
[Guest]: September of 2018.
[Guest]: So it was a very complex mix.
[Guest]: I tried to describe it to an extent in the previous chapter.
[Guest]: But no, I was never frustrated.
[Guest]: I think I tried to do my job.
[Guest]: At some point, I had to take a call on whether what I thought were the key issues, which
[Guest]: were now the intertwining of the fiscal and financial, whether being in the central bank
[Guest]: was the right position to raise these issues or being outside.
[Guest]: And that combined with my personal situation meant that it was better to be outside.
[Guest]: But exit was a form of voice to raise these issues.
[Guest]: And therefore, in the end, I decided to write the book because I wanted to flag these issues,
[Guest]: both as a historical account for everyone to see.
[Guest]: In fact, I've even put my minutes verbatim.
[Guest]: I have not even changed the description of the speeches.
[Guest]: I have not tried to provide any narrative in hindsight because I wanted to record them
[Guest]: as they were given rather than with the benefit of hindsight around, you know, what they meant.
[Guest]: Of course, the introduction chapter is entirely new and binds everything together.
[Guest]: The good news is I won't have done anything differently if I was given a rerun.
[Guest]: And I always had this clarity inside me that I want to be able to sleep at night with a
[Guest]: no regret outcome for the day.
[Guest]: If I could change something in the right direction based on my assessment of it, I should make
[Guest]: an earnest effort to do it and, you know, you accept whatever comes out of it.
[Guest]: These are very complex problems, complex sets of forces involved, not just economic, but
[Guest]: also political, as you mentioned.
[Guest]: And third and the last question, can you can you repeat what was the last point?
[Amit Varma]: My third was sort of a thinking aloud of how we cannot depend on many principles.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: And in fact, this is my thrust all along the book, which is that we have to strengthen
[Guest]: our institutions.
[Guest]: I think I'm very clear that this idea that a country can be made just on the basis of
[Guest]: a few individuals, of course, it is about individuals in the end, it's individuals who
[Guest]: have to make the institution stronger.
[Guest]: But as a framework for thinking about what the country needs, I think what we lack in
[Guest]: a significant measure is that our key institutions, enforcement of contracts, rule of law, the
[Guest]: independence of the financial regulatory processes, I think these need to be given greater sanctity
[Guest]: in the letter of the law, in their execution and implementation.
[Guest]: And they have to be more robust over long stretches of time to short term political,
[Guest]: industrial or other kinds of captures where the pressures might come from.
[Guest]: I think I see the independence or the operational autonomy of the central bank as a small piece
[Guest]: of this bigger puzzle that we have to solve on on strengthening our institution.
[Guest]: I think if our institutions are strong, if we get the right individuals, we will blossom
[Guest]: even further.
[Guest]: But if our institutions are weak, even with the right individuals, we might not be able
[Guest]: to make progress.
[Guest]: And I think that to me, is what we have to tackle.
[Guest]: A lot of the reforms are proposed, a lot of the reforms that are proposed in the individual
[Guest]: speeches, they are all about actually strengthening the institutions of the country in the financial
[Guest]: sector decision making.
[Guest]: And I think COVID has in a difficult way, I think, offered us the right opportunity
[Guest]: to undertake some of these institutional changes.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So my final question, which is, you know, something I ask all my guests on whatever
[Amit Varma]: is the subject we're speaking about, and, you know, you've been an insider in the system,
[Amit Varma]: you are, you know, you're intimately aware of all the nooks and crannies of the politics
[Amit Varma]: and the economics of it.
[Amit Varma]: If I ask you to look forward 10 years to the year 2030, and where India could be then,
[Amit Varma]: what's like a best case scenario and a worst case scenario for you or to phrase it differently,
[Amit Varma]: what gives you hope and what gives you despair about the trajectory of events right now?
[Guest]: See, I think what happens with having a financial sector that is not doing very well, what happens
[Guest]: with fiscal situation that's a bit overstretched, what happens with lack of adequate decentralization
[Guest]: and privatization of the sectors of the economy is that outcomes become very risky, they start
[Guest]: depending too much on political decisions that will be taken.
[Guest]: And of course, many people think this is actually a defining characteristic of what's an emerging
[Guest]: market versus what's a developed economy, which is that politics should not matter too
[Guest]: much to the end outcomes, because politics is mattering more and more even in developed
[Guest]: economies.
[Guest]: To me, that's a sign that they are also actually down, not such a great path in many cases.
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to say is that I think the risks have risen, in my view, not just
[Guest]: because of COVID, but because of our pre-COVID conditions as well, COVID has exacerbated
[Guest]: these risks.
[Guest]: If we take the transformational institutional reform path on fiscal, financial, and real
[Guest]: economy, I think given that the rest of the world is on average also sliding on to not
[Guest]: such a great path, we could actually emerge as very important winners in the process in
[Guest]: my view.
[Guest]: Viewed this way, this could be a golden opportunity for India, without doing much on our own.
[Guest]: The world is looking to diversify its supply chains away from China, and given our size,
[Guest]: given our workforce base, we are a natural contender.
[Guest]: So the question is, do we contend well, given that this opportunity has arisen?
[Guest]: And will we do what is required to really make it count?
[Guest]: I think, as I say in the first sentence of my appeal, no country can take growth for
[Guest]: granted.
[Guest]: It is like you have to invest in it every single day.
[Guest]: Sometimes you have made a big investment and then you can milk it for a while, but you
[Guest]: have to keep at it.
[Guest]: You simply can't take growth for granted.
[Guest]: No country is so good or strong that they can grow for decades without actually undertaking
[Guest]: more transformation along the way.
[Guest]: So that's the rosy part, that if we take the right institutional reforms in fiscal, financial,
[Guest]: and real side, the global situation is such that India could actually emerge to be a very
[Guest]: significant beneficiary.
[Guest]: See, we have always done well in services.
[Guest]: Where we have not done well is in manufacturing.
[Guest]: And where we have, I would say, finally shown signs of some conviction and intent is on
[Guest]: the agri side.
[Guest]: But on agri side, I think you need also consolidation of the sector, so that a lot of our agri labor
[Guest]: can actually move into higher paying and better skilled jobs over a period of time.
[Guest]: So to me, that's the rosy outcome that politics and economics indeed align, recognize the
[Guest]: opportunity that exists both in a global and in a domestic sense.
[Guest]: In a global sense, it's an opportunity, in a domestic sense, it's a necessity.
[Guest]: But it's not going to come without taking tough actions.
[Guest]: What is the bad scenario?
[Guest]: The bad scenario is one in which we don't get out of this regression of the last 10
[Guest]: years in going for more centralization, going for more quick fixes, to pump priming of the
[Guest]: economy, rather than actually putting in real pillars of fiscal, financial and real stability
[Guest]: for the next two or three decades.
[Guest]: If we go down that path, we just keep doing band-aids on our fiscal, financial and the
[Guest]: real economy side, I think we will see an erosion of the growth potential of the economy
[Guest]: on a steady basis, loss of productivity, loss of the ability to create good jobs and high
[Guest]: skilled jobs.
[Guest]: And it could just be, it could be sort of stagnation of growth, whether our supply side
[Guest]: remains benign, and doesn't allow inflation to pick up down the line, or whether inflation
[Guest]: also starts rising.
[Guest]: If inflation starts rising with stagnating growth, that would be a very, very terrible
[Guest]: stagflationary outcome.
[Guest]: Typically high debt situations also have their own deflationary pressures.
[Guest]: And so my sense is a bad scenario, a really bad scenario would be stagflation, a scenario
[Guest]: not as bad as that would be a stagnation of growth, but with also kind of very low inflation
[Guest]: or even deflation.
[Guest]: I think so, I think a course correction, if undertaken, could put us closer to the rosy
[Guest]: path.
[Guest]: But if we don't course correct, I think, I do fear that we are slipping in terms of our
[Guest]: growth potential.
[Guest]: That worries me.
[Guest]: But therefore, I hope that the book, the chapter, some of the messages in there at a minimum,
[Guest]: they get more individuals to think about economics in what they are demanding from the system.
[Guest]: As I said, you know, the ideas I have may not be the right ones, but I think they certainly
[Guest]: seem to be relevant questions for India.
[Guest]: And so hopefully, public debate can push the system closer to the rosier path than the
[Guest]: worst scenarios that I outlined.
[Amit Varma]: Viral, I love reading your book, and I enjoyed talking to you today, I think I've learned
[Amit Varma]: so much and it'll take me some time to, you know, listen to the episode again and process
[Amit Varma]: everything.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for your time and insights.
[Guest]: No, thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: It's been a terrific conversation and all the best to you and all the listeners and
[Guest]: to your loved ones for staying safe and healthy during these challenging and difficult times.
[Guest]: I hope that the curve is about to peak soon.
[Guest]: It shows showing some signs of declining over the last week or two, and I hope it has as
[Guest]: steady a decline as New York City had post mid-April.
[Guest]: For the last three, four months, I would love to see that every day I wake up and I see
[Guest]: I type India coronavirus cases.
[Guest]: That's my first thing I type because I want to see that the curve is steadily declining
[Guest]: for several weeks in a row so that we can start dealing with the post-COVID recovery
[Amit Varma]: phase very soon.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest online or offline
[Amit Varma]: bookstore and pick up Viral Acharya's book, Quest for Restoring Financial Stability in
[Amit Varma]: India.
[Amit Varma]: The show notes contain various other links, including interviews of his, so check that
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: Viral is not on social media, which is hardly a surprise.
[Amit Varma]: He is already viral, so why should he care about going even more viral?
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, that's A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A, where I promise
[Amit Varma]: lots of meaty links and few bad jokes like this.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.